# Price Discovery without Trading: Evidence from Limit Orders\*

Jonathan Brogaard Terrence Hendershott Ryan Riordan

First Draft: November 2014

Current Draft: May 2018

Abstract: We analyze the contribution to price discovery of market and limit orders by high frequency traders (HFTs) and non-HFTs. While market orders have a larger individual price impact, limit orders are far more numerous. This results in price discovery occurring predominantly through limit orders. HFTs submit the bulk of limit orders and these limit orders provide most of the price discovery. Submissions of limit orders and their contribution to price discovery fall with volatility due to changes in HFTs behavior. Consistent with adverse selection arising from faster reactions to public information, HFTs' informational advantage is partially explained by public information.

(for internet appendix click: http://bit.ly/2y381gp)

\* We thank Helen Hogarth, Victoria Pinnington, and IIROC for providing data and comments. All errors are our own. We thank participants at the 2015 Cambridge Microstructure Theory and Application Workshop, Baruch College, Boston College, Stockholm Business School, Hong Kong University, Chinese University of Hong Kong, University of Mannheim, Goethe University, Australia National University, and UC Santa Cruz HFT Workshop for helpful comments.

Contact: Jonathan Brogaard, Foster School of Business, University of Washington, (Email) brogaard@uw.edu (Tel) 206-685-7822; Terrence Hendershott, University of California – Berkeley, Haas School of Business, (Email) hender@haas.berkeley.edu (Tel) 510-643-0619; and Ryan Riordan, Smith School of Business, Queen’s University, (Email) ryan.riordan@queensu.ca (Tel) 705-761-8800.

# Introduction

The traditional view of price discovery is that trades reveal investors’ private information while maker makers’ quotes reflect public information (for example, Kyle (1985) and Glosten and Milgrom (1985)). Most stock exchanges and financial markets have evolved into limit order books where there are no designated market makers and limit orders represent the bulk of activity. Theoretical models of limit order books study informed traders’ choice between market orders and limit orders. This market/limit order choice by informed and uninformed investors determines the nature of price discovery and adverse selection. Using regulatory data enabling the classification of limit orders and trades by high-frequency traders (HFTs) and non-HFTs we systematically quantify the contribution to price discovery of market and limit orders by HFTs and non-HFTs primarily using a vector autoregression (VAR; Hasbrouck (1991a, 1991b, 1995)). We link these results to theoretical models of limit-order books.

The role of HFTs in adversely selecting others is widely debated by academics, regulators, and investors with concerns often focusing on HFTs using market orders to “pick off” stale limit orders (Foucault, Hombert, and Rosu (2015), Biais, Foucault, and Moinas (2015), Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015), and Foucault, Kozhan, and Tham (2017)). Relatedly, most empirical literature on price discovery focuses on the contribution of market orders (Hasbrouck (1991a, 1991b) and Brogaard, Hendershott, and Riordan (2014)).1 However, we find that HFTs’ limit orders contribute more than twice as much to price discovery as their market orders. In contrast, non-HFTs’ market orders contribute more to price discovery than their limit orders. Comparing HFTs to non-HFTs, we find that HFTs’ market orders are responsible for less price discovery than non-HFTs’ market orders, while HFTs’ limit orders are responsible for twice as much price discovery as non-HFTs’ limit orders. Overall, HFTs’ market orders play a smaller role in price discovery while HFTs’ limit orders play a larger role.2

Theoretical models of limit order books provide insights into the roles different orders by different traders play in price discovery (e.g., Goettler, Parlour, and Rajan (2009; GPR) and Hoffmann (2014)).3 These models focus on traders’ choice between market orders and limit orders based on the traders’ information and the state of the limit order book. Limit orders receive rather than pay the bid-ask spread, but do not execute with certainty. Market orders always execute, but pay the bid-ask spread. When information is more valuable and the spread is narrower, traders prefer market orders to limit orders. Traders with different characteristics face different tradeoffs in their order choice. Traders with no intrinsic motivation to trade (GPR) and fast traders (Hoffmann (2014)) who can revise their orders more often prefer limit orders because execution uncertainty is less costly for them and their limit orders face less adverse selection, respectively. HFTs fit both of these descriptions. These models are consistent with our empirical finding that HFTs submit the majority of limit orders.4 Also consistent with our empirical results, GPR and Hoffmann (2014) find that limit orders play a significant role in price discovery.5

GPR and Hoffmann (2014) are closely related models with traders choosing between market and limit orders where later arriving traders observe new public information.6 While GPR and Hoffmann (2014) provide similar findings for limit orders overall and for traders with characteristics shared by HFTs, the models provide differing predictions for how these findings vary depending on volatility.7 An important difference between GPR and Hoffmann (2014) is that in GPR investors have different and often large private gains from trade.

The basic trade-off in both models is between the risk of non-execution and the adverse selection risk associated with the submission of limit orders. When volatility is high the pickingoff risk is higher. Hoffmann’s (2014) fast traders can avoid being adversely selected by slowtraders but cannot submit market orders profitably. Therefore, the fast traders increase their limit order submissions when volatility is high.8 GPR include investors with large private values and speculators with zero private value. When volatility is high extreme private value investors submit better-priced limit orders to entice speculators to submit markets orders.9 The speculators in GPR then switch from limit to market orders. We find that HFTs reduce their use of limit orders when volatility is high. This suggests that modeling heterogeneity in trading motives is important for understanding HFTs and limit-order markets.

We find that more aggressive orders have higher price impacts.10 Market orders, the most aggressive order type, have the highest impact, followed by orders that change the NBBO, followed by orders at the NBBO, and orders behind the NBBO. Despite their lower individual price impact, limit orders provide the majority of price discovery because they are far more numerous: market orders represent less than five percent of messages.11 Individual HFT market orders contribute more to price discovery on average than non-HFT market orders. However, non-HFT market orders are three times more likely, making them more important in total. HFT limit order submissions and cancellations are both frequent and informative leading HFT limit orders to contribute roughly $30 \%$ of total price discovery versus roughly $1 5 \%$ for non-HFTs.

That HFT limit order submissions have positive price impacts is seemingly at odds with Brogaard, Hendershott, and Riordan (2014) results showing that HFT’s liquidity supplying trades have negative price impacts.12 Brogaard, Hendershott, and Riordan’s (2014) analysis of only executed trades does not capture the impact of limit orders that do not execute. For example, a natural reason why a limit order to buy does not execute is that the price increases. This is consistent with the limit order contributing to price discovery without trading. When a limit order executes its price impact is effectively the opposite of the market orders that it executed against. For example, when a buy market order executes against a sell limit order on average the efficient price increases. This leads to the buy market order having a positive price impact and the sell limit order having a negative price impact upon execution. This logic is why Brogaard, Hendershott, and Riordan (2014) find that HFT’s liquidity supplying trades have negative price impacts. The price impact of limit orders upon submission is the weighted average of the (negative) price impact of the executed limit orders and the (positive) price impact of the limit orders that do not execute. Given that only five percent of limit orders execute, it is not surprising that average price impact for executed and non-executed limit orders is positive.

Price discovery switching from limit to market orders has implications for market stability and possible market failure.13 Madhavan (1992) shows how continuous markets can fail when adverse selection is sufficiently high. If volatility increases due to greater private information then market failure is more likely. If informed liquidity providers switch from limit order to market orders when volatility increases, then market failure becomes even more likely. We show HFTs reduce their use of limit orders as volatility increases, reducing the contribution of their limit orders to price discovery. When volatility increases, the market/limit order tradeoff between execution speed/certainty and price increases more in favor of market orders for the informed traders than the uninformed traders. This raises the concern of endogenous fragility in continuous limit order books. This is an important area for further empirical and theoretical research.

Several concerns about HFTs have been raised in the literature. First, a number of theoretical papers study how fast traders like HFTs can adversely select slower traders. For example, Foucault, Hombert, and Rosu (2015), Biais, Foucault, and Moinas (2015), and Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015) examine how some traders trading faster on public signals increases information asymmetry.14 Our results lend some support to these concerns. For example, we find that the larger price impact of HFTs' orders is partially explained by public information, such as the state of the limit order book and lagged returns in a correlated asset, the TSX 60 exchange traded fund. However, our results suggest that trading on such public information is not the majority of HFTs role in overall price discovery.15 Second, HFTs could be “front running” non-HFTs’ orders by detecting large non-HFT orders that are split over time or across exchange (Hirschey (2016), Korajczyk and Murphy (2017), and van Kervel and Menkveld (2017)). We find that HFTs’ orders generally do not anticipate non-HFTs’ orders in the same direction and some evidence that HFTs may react more quickly to public information. For instance, HFT orders that move the NBBO negatively predict the same non-HFT orders and non-HFT market orders at the NBBO. While this is consistent with HFTs observing and reacting to public signals before non-HFTs are able to react, we also show that HFTs’ limit orders’ contribution to price discovery is not solely due to their orders arriving only slightly ahead of non-HFTs’ limit orders.

We also examine price discovery for stocks across markets. We examine HFTs’ activity and price discovery on each exchange and across exchanges. As with the market-wide results, HFTs are the predominant channel of price discovery on each exchange through their limit orders. While significant price discovery occurs within the same second across exchanges, HFTs’ limit orders’ role in price discovery is predominate even when sampling at the one-second frequency. Hence, it does not appear solely due to minuscule differences in speed. Finally, HFTs react more to events on other exchanges than non-HFTs, consistent with HFTs integrating the markets. While this seems beneficial in a fragmented market, whether or not such integration is better than trading occurring on a centralized exchange is an open question.

# I. Data and Institutional Details

Data are provided by the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada (IIROC). The data include every message submitted on recognized equity markets in Canada with masked market IDs, masked participant IDs, security IDs, date and timestamp to the millisecond, order type, order volume, and a buy/sell indicator.16 Importantly the data identifies activities across exchanges as the masked participant IDs remain constant across days, securities, and markets. IIROC requires exchanges to report messages in a standardized format. As such, some order types may be recorded as multiple orders. For example, modifications are reported to IIROC as a cancel and a new order.

# a. Trading Landscape

Canada has a number of equity markets on which trading is organized. We identify nine in total and present summary statistics on the three largest exchanges.17 Trading on these three exchanges makes up more than $9 8 \%$ of the total trading volume in our sample stocks for our sample period.

Markets in Canada are similar to United States markets in that electronic limit order books observe price-time-display priority. Canadian markets differ from US markets during our sample period in that Canadian markets are less fragmented, do not allow sub-penny trading, and that dark orders must improve the price by half of the tick. Orders in Canada during the sample period are protected via order protection rules (OPR).18 OPR apply to marketplaces that provide “automated functionality.” Automated functionality includes automatically displaying and updating the status of each participants’ orders, as well as the ability to immediately and automatically accept incoming orders, execute those orders, and cancel any unexecuted portion of those orders marked as immediate-or-cancel. OPR only apply to visible orders and the visible parts of orders. The OPR requires marketplaces to implement rules to prevent trade-throughs “or executing before, immediately accessible, visible, better-priced limit orders.”

In contrast to Regulation NMS in the United States, Canadian markets implement a full depth-of-book protection. This means that before an order is executed marketplaces must ensure that all protected orders that are visible at better price levels have been executed. Canadian regulations also impose best execution obligations on brokers. These regulations require dealers and advisors “to execute a trade on the most advantageous terms reasonably available under the circumstances when acting for a client.” See Korajczyk and Murphy (2017) for additional institutional details.

The Canadian market has seen a dramatic increase in competition for investor order-flow since 2008. In May of 2007 a consortium of Canada’s largest banks announced a trading platform designed to compete with the TSX, called Alpha Trading Systems. Shortly thereafter in December of 2007 Chi-X announced their intention to commence trading in selected Canadian stocks on February $2 0 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ , 2008. In response TSX rolled out new trading technology (TSX Quantum) to all TSX-listed stocks. In 2012 TSX’s parent company, the Maple Group, purchased Alpha and now operates Alpha as a separate exchange within the TMX group of exchanges.

# b. Sample

For our sample we select the 15 securities that are part of the TSX 60, the primary Canadian equity index, at the end of 2014 that are not cross-listed in the United States. The other 45 stocks in the TSX 60 are cross-listed. We exclude cross-listed stocks as we cannot measure message activity occurring off Canadian exchanges in the same way. In addition, cross-listed stocks may have different properties (Bacidore and Sofianos (2002)). Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for the sample stocks: market capitalization, share price, trade size, number of trades, number of shares traded, dollar volume traded, national best bid and offer (NBBO) quoted half-spread, % HFT, $\%$ HFT demand, $\%$ HFT supply and the standard deviation of returns. Market Cap. is the average market capitalization for the sample period, from 10/15/2012 to 06/28/2013.19 Std. Dev. of Returns is the daily standard deviation of stock returns based on end-of-day prices during the sample period. Market capitalization and the standard deviation of stock returns are based on data from Datastream. All other variables are reported as stock day averages during the sample period using the IIROC data. Table 1 includes activities from all exchanges, whereas the remaining tables only include observations from the three largest exchanges.

# INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE

The firms in our sample have market capitalizations that range from $\$ 1.95$ Billion CAD to more than $\$ 28$ Billion CAD. Share prices vary between $\$ 20$ and $\$ 76$ , with the exception of Bombardier with a price of $\$ 4.00$ . The stocks in our sample are actively traded with between $\$ 11.84$ million and $\$ 70.97$ million traded per stock day. The stocks are relatively liquid with quoted half-spreads between 1.38 and 12.64 basis points.

# c. HFT classification

We classify trader IDs as HFT using the following criteria over the entire sample period:

(a) Make up more than . $2 5 \%$ of trading volume;   
(b) Have an end of day inventory of less than $20 \%$ of their trading volume; and   
(c) Never hold more than $30 \%$ of their daily trading volume at one time within the trading day.

The methodology uses similar trade and inventory characteristics as Kirilenko et al. (2017), who also categorize traders as HFT based on data-driven criteria. While there is no commonly accepted definition for all characteristics of HFTs, these criteria captures an important aspect of HFTs: they are relatively large short-term speculators. Small HFTs or HFTs that hold larger positions would be classified as non-HFTs. Other strategies that could be thought of as HFT, e.g., arbitraging between the cash and futures market where offsetting position are often held overnight, could also be incorrectly characterized as non-HFT. Trading firms can have multiple IDs. If HFT firms split their trading across IDs such that the individual IDs fail to meet our criteria, but the aggregation across all firm IDs would meet the criteria, then our approach incorrectly identifies those IDs as non-HFT. Any misclassifications could attenuate the differences between HFTs and non-HFTs. We identify 61 HFT IDs from the 1706 IDs in the Canadian market. In each stock each day an average of 13.06 HFT IDs are active while 185.36 non-HFTs are active. When HFTs are active in a stock they on average trade on 2.06 exchanges per stock day.

Table 1 shows HFT participation varies across the sample of stocks ranging from $12 . 1 \%$ to $30 . 1 \%$ . HFT liquidity demand and supply participation in trades are not evenly distributed, ranging from 11.4% and $2 3 . 0 \%$ for demand and $9 . 5 \%$ and $4 0 . 6 \%$ for supply. HFTs generally supply more liquidity than they demand in our sample, but there is variation across stocks, suggesting that HFT strategies may also vary across stocks.

Table 2 reports statistics on HFT and non-HFT participants. The average HFT is more active in terms of message activity, trades, shares and volume traded, and has a higher message to trade ratio.20 Overall HFTs hold less inventory throughout and at the end of the trading day. HFTs hold considerably less inventory than their trading would imply.

# INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE

HFTs on average submit 15 times as many messages (4,450 versus 290) and trade six times more often (240 versus 41) than do non-HFTs. This leads to HFTs having an order-to-trade ratio more than twice that of the non-HFTs (65 versus 27). HFTs’ average trade size is less than one sixth the size of non-HFTs’ trades ( $\$ 5,664$ versus $\$ 37,532$ ). We find that HFTs exhibit small trade sizes, high order-to-trade ratios, and other commonly accepted characteristic of HFTs, providing support for our classification approach.

We also compile inventory statistics to better understand how HFTs and non-HFTs manage their inventory.21 We report the absolute value of the end-of-day inventory / dollar volume traded for that stock on that day, the absolute value of the maximum inventory observed / dollar volume traded for that stock on that day, and the number of days where the absolute value of the end-ofday inventory / dollar volume traded is below $3 \%$ . For all inventory statistics HFTs hold less inventory, relative to their trading volume at the end-of-day, $11 \%$ versus $70 \%$ , and have lower intraday maximums, $18 \%$ versus $80 \%$ . HFTs’ inventories are consistent with short-run speculators closely managing risk.

To begin the examination of overall activities by HFTs and non-HFTs Table 3 reports the frequency of messages by participant type, order type, and aggressiveness. Limit orders’ aggressiveness is determined relative to the NBBO: marketable limit orders (trades) that change the NBBO and those that do not, limit orders and cancels that move the NBBO, limit orders and cancels at the NBBO, limit orders and cancels 1 tick behind the NBBO, and limit orders and cancels $\mathbf { \Sigma } > \mathbf { 1 }$ tick behind the NBBO. On the average stock day 72,466 orders, including trades and cancelations, are placed. Table 2 shows individual HFTs being much more active, but the large number of non-HFTs results in HFTs comprising roughly half $( 5 3 \% )$ of aggregate message activity.22

# INSERT TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE

Limit order submissions are the most frequent messages making up $48 \%$ , with cancellations making up $47 \%$ . The focus of most of the literature on price discovery, market orders, make up less than $5 \%$ of all activity. Activity at and better than the NBBO makes up roughly $50 \%$ of overall activity. HFTs are more active at best prices, making up $60 \%$ of total activity and less active than non-HFTs at prices at least 1 tick from the NBBO, $22 \%$ versus $27 \%$ . Activity that moves the NBBO is likely important for price discovery, but it makes up only $5 \%$ of all market activity: $0 . 5 \%$ market orders, $3 . 4 \%$ limit order submission, and $1 . 5 \%$ limit order cancellations. HFTs’ orders that move the NBBO are almost twice as frequent as the same orders from non-HFTs, $2 . 1 5 \%$ versus $1 . 2 9 \%$ . The remaining $9 5 \%$ of activity doesn’t change prices and later sections show that these orders do not play an important role in price discovery.

# II. Market-wide Price Discovery

To investigate how the different messages impact price discovery we use Fleming, Mizrach, and Nguyen’s (2017) extension of Hasbrouck (1991a). The VAR models movements in the efficient price using past price movements and the arrivals and cancellations of new orders. The model dynamically estimates the relation between order submissions and cancellations and future movements in the efficient price.23 Causal interpretations in the VAR come from the ordering of events in time. The VAR incorporates trades and limit order activity, both submissions and cancellations, at various price levels into the standard price discovery VAR. We extend it further by separating HFTs’ and non-HFTs’ activity. For each stock-day the VAR model is:

$$
{ \begin{array} { l } { { \boldsymbol { r } } _ { t } = \displaystyle \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { 5 } \alpha _ { i } ^ { 1 } { \boldsymbol { r } } _ { t - i } + \displaystyle \sum _ { i = 0 } ^ { 5 } \beta _ { i } ^ { 1 , 1 } X _ { t - i } ^ { 1 } + \displaystyle \sum _ { i = 0 } ^ { 5 } \beta _ { i } ^ { 1 , 2 } X _ { t - i } ^ { 2 } + \cdots + \displaystyle \sum _ { i = 0 } ^ { 5 } \beta _ { i } ^ { 1 , 2 0 } X _ { t - i } ^ { 2 0 } + \mu _ { t } ^ { 1 } } \\ { { \boldsymbol { X } } _ { t } ^ { 1 } = \displaystyle \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { 5 } \alpha _ { i } ^ { 2 } { \boldsymbol { r } } _ { t - i } + \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { 5 } \beta _ { i } ^ { 2 , 1 } X _ { t - i } ^ { 1 } + \displaystyle \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { 5 } \beta _ { i } ^ { 2 , 2 } X _ { t - i } ^ { 2 } + \cdots + \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { 5 } \beta _ { i } ^ { 2 , 2 0 } X _ { t - i } ^ { 2 0 } + \mu _ { t } ^ { 2 } } \\ { { \boldsymbol { X } } _ { t } ^ { 2 } = \displaystyle \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { 5 } \alpha _ { i } ^ { 3 } { \boldsymbol { r } } _ { t - i } + \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { 5 } \beta _ { i } ^ { 3 , 1 } X _ { t - i } ^ { 1 } + \displaystyle \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { 5 } \beta _ { i } ^ { 3 , 2 } X _ { t - i } ^ { 2 } + \cdots + \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { 5 } \beta _ { i } ^ { 3 , 2 0 } X _ { t - i } ^ { 2 0 } + \mu _ { t } ^ { 3 } } \end{array} }
$$

$$
X _ { t } ^ { 1 4 } = \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { 5 } \alpha _ { i } ^ { 2 1 } r _ { t - i } + \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { 5 } \beta _ { i } ^ { 2 1 , 1 } X _ { t - i } ^ { 1 } + \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { 5 } \beta _ { i } ^ { 2 1 , 2 } X _ { t - i } ^ { 2 } + \cdots + \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { 5 } \beta _ { i } ^ { 2 1 , 2 0 } X _ { t - i } ^ { 2 0 } + \mu _ { t } ^ { 2 1 }
$$

where $\alpha$ captures the coefficient on the midpoint return series, $r _ { \mathrm { { ; } } }$ , lagged 1 – 5 periods; $\beta$ captures the coefficient on the 20 limit order and trade variables, $X ^ { 1 } - X ^ { 2 0 }$ . Note that contemporaneous events can cause price changes: the return equation includes the contemporaneous and five lag values of the limit order and trade variables, whereas the remaining VAR equations do not include contemporaneous terms.

The VAR is in event time, t, with each message being an observation. The 20 $X$ variables are: HFT Trade – Change Price, HFT Trade – Same Price, HFT Improving Order, HFT Worsening Cancel, HFT Order Placement at NBBO, HFT Cancel at NBBO, HFT Order 1 tick from NBBO, HFT Cancel 1 tick from NBBO, HFT Order $>$ 1 tick from NBBO, HFT Cancel $>$ 1 tick from NBBO, non-HFT Trade – Change Price, non-HFT Trade – Same Price, non-HFT Improving Order, non-HFT Worsening Cancel, non-HFT Order Placement at NBBO, non-HFT Cancel at NBBO, non-HFT Order 1 tick from NBBO, non-HFT Cancel 1 tick from NBBO, non-HFT Order > 1 tick from NBBO, and non-HFT Cancel $>$ 1 tick from NBBO. “HFT” named variables capture directional activity by HFT firms, and “non-HFT” named variables capture directional activity by non-HFT firms. Below we use “activity” and “directional activity” interchangeably. Trade takes the value $\mathbf { + 1 }$ for buyer initiated trades, $\mathbf { - 1 }$ for seller initiated trades, and 0 otherwise. Order takes $^ { + 1 }$ for bids placed at the NBB, $\mathbf { - 1 }$ for offers placed at the NBO, and 0 otherwise. Order 1 tick from NBBO takes $^ { + 1 }$ for bids placed at one cent from the NBB, $\mathbf { - 1 }$ for offers placed at one cent from the NBO, and 0 otherwise. Order $>$ 1 tick from NBBO takes $^ { + 1 }$ for bids placed greater than one cent from the NBB, $\mathbf { - 1 }$ for offers placed at greater than one cent from the NBO, and 0 otherwise. For cancels the analogous definition applies with the sign such that cancels at the bid take the value - 1 and cancels at the offer take the value $\mathbf { + 1 }$ .

The observations include all displayed orders between 9:45 a.m. EST and 3:45 p.m. EST. To be included a stock-day must have at least 20 non-zero observations in each variable. This eliminates 34 stock-days. The IRF is orthogonalized and order independent and reports the forecasted midpoint return, in basis points, after a $^ { + 1 }$ (buy event for orders and trades, sell event for cancels). The IRF is cumulative over the following 20 events. The VAR is estimated for each stock each day. The averages of these stock-day IRF estimates are reported in basis points. For HFT and non-HFT a \*, \*\* next to the coefficient represents an average coefficient that differs from zero and is statistically significant at the 5 and $1 \%$ level. In the Difference column \*, \*\* next to the value represents that the HFT and non-HFT coefficients statistical differ at the 5 and $1 \%$ significance level, respectively. Throughout the paper standard errors are clustered by stock and day to control for contemporaneous correlation across stocks and autocorrelation within stocks as in Thompson (2011).

To obtain impulse response functions we invert the VAR into its vector moving average representation. We calculate the impulse response functions (IRFs) for an unexpected buy message to measure its impact on returns. The return IRFs measure all types of messages’ price impact, often referred to as the contribution to price discovery or information content of a message/order (event).

The VAR linearly models the dynamics between all order types and returns. The impulse response functions measure the impact that innovations in orders have on subsequent orders and returns. Modeling the dynamics enables proper measurement of the sequence of events. For example, suppose that some negative news arrives. HFTs immediately race to pick off stale bid orders. The first successful HFT picks off all mispriced buy limit orders with a single sell market order. Then, other HFTs update their ask orders to quickly gain priority at new (lower) prices in the limit order book. The initial sell market order leads to an immediate price change by executing against all orders at bid. The subsequent new orders at the ask also cause a price change. The return IRF aggregates immediate and predictable responses to the initial sell market order. Hence, both the immediate price change and the lagged price change are attributed to the market order. The price change due to the predictable limit orders is not attributed to the limit order because the limit orders are not a “surprise” or innovation in the VAR system.

# INSERT TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE

Table 4 reports the estimates of the return IRFs from the VAR and can be interpreted as the average permanent price impact of an order type, aggressiveness, and participant combination. Orders generally have a positive permanent price impact. Trades that move the NBBO have the highest price impact followed by limit orders and cancels that move the NBBO. Market orders that move the NBBO are limit orders priced aggressively with enough size to consume all liquidity at the best price. Activity behind the best prices contributes relatively little to price discovery on average. HFT and non-HFT orders greater than 1-tick behind the NBBO both have a negative price impact. This is likely due to order submission geared towards establishing limit order book priority. If the market is likely to tick in the direction of the submitted order, e.g., the market moves up after a sell limit order is submitted, the order will have a negative price impact, but will also have time priority in the limit order book.24 In this interpretation, it is not that the order causes the price movement, but that the order predicts the price movement. This seems to be fairly prevalent. It does not imply that randomly placed orders away from the inside have negative price impact, but, rather, that orders are placed away from the inside when prices are about to move in the opposite direction of the order.

HFTs directional activity generally moves prices more than non-HFT activity. Column 3 reports differences between HFT and non-HFT IRFs in basis points. Consistent with previous studies on HFTs and price discovery (Brogaard, Hendershott, and Riordan (2014)) we find that HFTs’ market orders move prices more than non-HFTs’ market orders. Orders that move the NBBO also contribute considerably to price discovery. HFTs’ limit order submissions that move the NBBO move prices by 1.56 basis points on average and the same order for non-HFTs moves prices by 1.12 basis points. With the exception of cancellations that move the NBBO and activity behind the best prices, HFTs’ orders impact prices more than do non-HFTs’ orders.

It is unclear however what makes an average HFT order more informative than an average non-HFT order. Similar orders should have similar price impacts conditional on placement in the limit order book. Potential explanations are that HFTs use market data to learn when prices are likely to move, e.g., the depth at the best bid and ask prices is not equal, or they may be reacting faster to common information, e.g., the futures or ETF price moves. Both possibilities could lead to higher price impacts. HFTs learning from market data could lead them to trade more when price impacts are higher than average. HFTs reacting faster to common signals will lead their orders to have higher price impacts than slower subsequent orders from non-HFTs. We explore these possibilities below.

The VAR estimates used in Table 4 also generate IRFs to explain how innovations in buy and sell messages predict the direction of subsequent buy and sell messages within and across order types and participant types. These IRFs provide evidence on HFTs and non-HFTs response to market activity. As in Table 4, Table 5 reports the average of stock-day IRF estimates.

# INSERT TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE

The rows in Table 5 correspond to the message variable being shocked by one unit. The columns denote the participant and message response. For instance, the Trade ΔNBBO HFT row provides IRF estimates for how all the HFT and non-HFT message types respond to an HFT buy trade that changes the NBBO. Table 5 shows the diagonal effects, as in Biais, Hillion, and Spatt (1995), showing that orders follow similar orders. Simply summing the columns across rows shows that HFT response to market activity is greater than that of non-HFTs. HFTs respond more to their own activity than to the activity of non-HFTs and more than non-HFTs respond to the activity of other non-HFTs. HFT activity predicts almost no additional activity from non-HFTs. That HFTs closely monitor market activity is consistent with the predictions of GPR in that speculators’ order submission strategies are more sensitive to market activity than are nonspeculators’ order submission strategies.

Activity across market participants can be positively correlated for several reasons (Biais, Hillion, and Spatt (1995)). First, investors may react to common signals, but with different speeds. Second, HFTs could be “front running” non-HFTs’ orders by detecting large non-HFT orders that are split over time or across exchange (Hirschey (2016), Korajczyk and Murphy (2017), and van Kervel and Menkveld (2017)). In both of these cases slower investor will follow faster investors using the same order type. Third, investors may learn from one another. In an anonymous market, learning should be symmetric across investor types, e.g., HFTs learn the same from HFTs’ and non-HFTs’ orders. The sequencing of order activity and its symmetry across HFT and non-HFT provide some insight to disentangle learning from reacting to common signal with different speeds or quasi-front running.

Table 5 shows that non-HFT activity mostly follows previous non-HFT activity but does not follow HFT activity. HFT activity follows both HFT and non-HFT activity but HFTs’ orders do not generally anticipate non-HFTs’ orders in the same direction. We find some evidence that HFTs may react more quickly to public information. For instance, HFT orders that move the NBBO negatively predict the same non-HFT orders and non-HFT market orders at the NBBO. While these types of problematic behavior do not represent the majority of HFTs’ activity, this does not imply that HFTs never adversely select non-HFTs or quasi-front run their orders. HFT activity following activity by HFTs and non-HFTs is also consistent with HFTs learning from other participants.

The largest difference in return IRFs between HFT and non-HFT from Table 4 is for limit order submissions that move the NBBO (0.44 basis points difference). This could arise from HFTs’ orders improving the NBBO by a greater amount or by HFTs’ orders predicting future activity that will move the NBBO further. An intuitive way to compare the response to HFTs’ orders that move the NBBO and the same for non-HFTs is to sum across the largest three response coefficients for each. For an HFTs’ order that moves the NBBO this leads to the following largest responses: HFT order that moves the NBBO (0.22 basis points), HFT order at the NBBO (0.65 basis points), and a non-HFT order at the NBBO (0.18 basis points), for a total response of 1.05 basis point of additional activity. The same for non-HFT leads to the following largest responses: HFT order that moves the NBBO (0.37), a non-HFT trade at the NBBO (0.21), and a non-HFT order that moves the NBBO (0.39), for a total response of 0.97 basis points of additional activity. The difference is not large but may partially explain the larger price impacts of HFT orders that move the NBBO.

The linear system of the VAR limits the structure of interdependency in the system dynamics. To further understand the role of HFTs’ and non-HFTs’ orders in price discovery we use a related approach that simply measures the price movement following an order. This price impact can be calculated for different message types conditional on some sources of public information, market conditions, and order sequences. Comparing the unconditional and conditional relative price impact of HFTs’ and non-HFTs’ orders demonstrates how much of HFTs’ higher price impact stems from things that can be thought of as public information.

# INSERT TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE

Table 6 reports averages of OLS regressions of the 10-second signed price impacts (in basis points) performed for each stock-day on all messages that change or are at the NBBO. Signed price impacts measure the movement in the midpoint in the direction of the order at the time the order hits the order book and 10-seconds later and are an intuitive way to understand how orders affect prices. For instance if the midpoint for a $\$ 10$ stock increases (decreases) by $\$ 0.10$ after 10- seconds after the entry of a limit buy (sell) order, that order would be associated with a 100 basis point price impact. Midpoints that move in the opposite direction of placed orders have a negative price impact. Table 4 shows that orders behind the best price in the order book have low price impacts. To simplify presentation and exposition, these orders are excluded from Table 6.

The first two columns of Table 6 are the price impact results for Trades. The next two columns are for new Orders and the last two are for Order Cancels. HFT takes the value 1 if an HFT placed the message, and zero otherwise. Order Size is the number shares. Stock Volatility is the absolute value of the previous 10-second stock return (in percent). XIU Volatility is the absolute value of the previous 10-second return of the TSX 60 exchange traded fund, XIU (in percent). Relative Spread is the stock’s contemporaneous bid-ask spread divided by the midpoint price (in percent). Lag Stock Return (1-10 second) is the signed 10-second lagged stock return (in percent). Lag XIU Return (1-10 second) is the signed 10-second lagged XIU return (in percent). Limit Order Book Imbalance is the stock’s contemporaneous signed limit order book imbalance defined as (depth at best bid price – depth at best ask price) / (depth at best bid price $^ +$ depth at best ask price) for buy messages, and the negative of that value for sell messages. Hidden Order plays two roles depending on whether the column is for trades or new orders.25 Hidden Order takes the value 1 if the message was a hidden order in the Order column and 1 in the Trade column if the trade executes against a hidden order, and zero otherwise. A trade executing against a hidden order can be thought of as the trade being executed in different market conditions as hidden orders may be predictable. Change NBBO is the immediate change (in basis points) in the NBBO because of the message. This variable controls for the possibility that HFTs or non-HFTs submit more aggressive orders or their trades are more likely to go through more levels of the order book. Order Cancel followed by Order by Same Trader (Opposite Direction) takes the value 1 when the same trader immediately cancels a buy (sell) order followed by a buy (sell) order (or the reverse), and zero otherwise. Order Cancel Followed by Trade by Same Trader (Opposite Direction) takes the value 1 when the same trader immediately cancels a buy (sell) order followed by a buy (sell) trade (or the reverse), and zero otherwise.

HFT limit orders that move the NBBO having a larger price impact than the same orders for non-HFT could arise from HFTs conditioning their order submission on public information or because they submit orders more when price impacts are high. For example, HFT could be using the information in futures or ETF prices to trade in the constituent stocks. Or, as shown in Brogaard, Hendershott, and Riordan (2014) for trades, HFT price impacts may be higher because they submit more orders in the direction of limit order imbalances and, therefore, price impacts are higher. The price impact regressions control for some obvious sources of public information and market conditions when price impacts may be high or low.

A notable result in Table 6 is that controlling for public information and market conditions explains some of the higher HFT price impact.26 For trades, the coefficient for HFT decreases from 1.58 basis points when not conditioning on public information to 0.96 basis points when conditioning on public information and from 0.16 to 0.11 for new orders. This also holds for order cancels in that there is a statistically significantly lower price impact for HFTs. The HFT coefficient falls by about one-third with the inclusion of the public information variables. One interpretation is that this suggests that one-third of HFTs contribution to price discovery is due to public information. Significantly more analysis is need to confirm the accuracy of that intuitive estimate.

An additional result that follows from Biais, Hillion and Spatt (1995) is that new orders submitted with wide spreads will have a lower price impact than for the same order submitted with tight spreads. Orders submitted within the spread when spreads are wide are more likely to be driven by a desire to be at the top of the queue than for information reasons. Conversely trades submitted with wide spreads are more likely to be driven by informed traders that are willing to pay higher liquidity costs to profit from their information.

Price impacts are generally increasing in order size, lagged index returns, limit order book imbalances, and the immediate size of an NBBO changes. Price impacts declining with limit order book imbalances means that when a trader improves the NBBO with a new order on the side with more depth the order appears less motivated by information. The trader likely believes adverse selection is low and the new order is simply trying to get priority over the large depth at the previous NBBO. These orders have lower price impacts. When an order is placed at or better than the NBBO on the side where depth is lower the order appears more motivated by information and has a larger price impact. Price impacts are generally decreasing in lagged signed stock returns and for hidden orders. Hidden orders seem to be submitted by uninformed market participants as they have lower price impacts (Zhu (2013)). Trades executing against hidden orders have smaller price impacts, likely because the midpoint of the bid-ask spread does not incorporate the hidden order.

Table 4 reports negative impulse response functions for non-HFT cancels at and greater than one tick behind the NBBO. The last two rows of Table 6 report order sequences that include cancels that may lead to lower than average price impacts. For instance, a trader may decide to cancel an order because the NBBO has moved away from their order and they then submit a new more aggressively price order. This would lead the initially cancelled order to have a lower than average price impact. The results show that cancels followed by orders and trades in the opposite direction do in fact lead to lower price impacts for cancels. Also, as expected the coefficient is lower when the subsequent order is less aggressively priced (-0.37 versus -0.99).

The previous results are informative about the average price impact of a message. However, given the autocorrelation and cross-correlation in message activity in Table 5, one cannot simply weight the IRFs by the message frequencies in Table 3 to determine each message type’s contribution to overall price discovery. The Hasbrouck (1991b) variance decomposition weights the IRFs by the variance of innovations in each order type to calculate the total contribution to price discovery by participant, order type, and relative aggressiveness in the order book. The VAR reported in Table 4 produces the estimates to calculate the variance decomposition reported in Table 7.27

# INSERT TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE

In total, market orders at and that change the best price contribute roughly $30 \%$ to price discovery. Another $45 \%$ of price discovery occurs via limit orders. Of that $45 \%$ , $8 8 \%$ is impounded via limit orders that change the best price. In fact, $62 \%$ of price discovery is attributed to orders and trades that move the best prices. This suggests two important insights, (1) the order book significantly contributes to price discovery, and (2) that orders that change the best prices contain more information than those that do not.

HFT limit orders that change the NBBO are more than twice as important as the same order from non-HFTs $1 9 . 6 \%$ versus $8 . 2 \%$ ). This is mostly explained by the fact that HFTs submit twice as many orders that change the NBBO than do non-HFTs $( 2 . 1 5 \%$ versus $1 . 2 9 \%$ in Table 3). The price impact of HFT orders that move the NBBO is larger than the same orders for non-HFTs, leading HFT limit orders that move the NBBO to contribute more to price discovery than any other participant/order–aggressiveness combination.

Trades that move the NBBO and cancels that move the NBBO are also important in terms of price discovery. The differences and magnitudes in price discovery are commensurate with their relative frequencies and price impacts. For instance, non-HFT trades that move the NBBO are more frequent than for HFT and have a higher price impact. This leads their overall role in price discovery to be greater than for HFT trades that move the NBBO. For cancels, HFTs are roughly 2.5 times more likely to cancel orders that move the NBBO than are non-HFTs. This leads their role in price discovery to be higher $( 8 . 8 \% )$ than for non-HFTs $( 5 . 2 \% )$ despite the slightly lower price impacts of HFT cancels.

HFTs contribute the most to price discovery via their limit orders and non-HFTs via their market orders. This suggests that HFTs make different order submission decisions conditional on their information than non-HFTs. This is consistent with the theoretical literature (GPR and others) that speculators use limit orders more.

A testable prediction from the limit-order-book literature is that speculators reduce their submission of limit orders as volatility increases (Bloomfield et al. (2005) and GPR) or whether they increase them as suggested by Hoffmann (2014). Table 8 directly examines the relationship between stock volatility and message frequency. Table 8 reports the results from OLS regressions on the message frequencies by limit/market order and HFT/non-HFT from Table 3. % by Limit Order is the percent of messages by limit order book submissions and cancellations. % by HFT Limit Order is the percent of the limit order book submissions and cancellation by HFTs. % by HFT Limit Order / % HFT is the percent of the HFT limit orders and cancellations by total HFT.

% by HFT Limit Order / % by Limit Order is the $\%$ HFT limit orders normalized by the $\%$ of total limit orders. % by HFT Limit Order / % by Market Order is the percent of the $\%$ HFT limit orders normalized by the $\%$ of market orders. $\%$ by non-HFT Limit Order is the percent of non-HFT limit orders. % by non-HFT Limit Order / % non-HFT is the percent of non-HFT limit orders normalized by the $\%$ total non-HFT. An observation is a stock-day. Because stock volatility is persistent and to avoid simultaneity between volatility and traders’ order choice, Stock Volatility $\left( t - 1 \right)$ is the daily absolute return in percent the prior day. To focus on within stock volatility we include two cross-sectional controls.28 Market Capitalization is the market capitalization of the stock, in billions. 1 / Price is the reciprocal of the stock price.

# INSERT TABLE 8 ABOUT HERE

The predictions of Bloomfield et al. (2005) and GPR for informed traders are generally confirmed in Table 8. For example, limit order submission frequency falls by $0 . 9 9 \%$ per $1 \%$ increase in the previous day’s volatility. The decrease in limit order submissions is driven by the reduction in HFT limit orders. Per $1 \%$ increase in previous day stock volatility HFT limit order frequency falls by a statistically significant $3 . 0 8 \%$ and $3 . 4 0 \%$ , relative to limit orders and overall activity, respectively. Per $1 \%$ increase in volatility non-HFT limit order submissions increase by $2 . 4 1 \%$ relative to overall activity. Overall limit order submissions are less frequent for larger stocks and for lower priced stocks. However, HFT limit order submissions are more frequent in larger stocks and lower priced stocks. Table 8 suggests that HFT and non-HFT limit order submission frequencies vary differently with volatility. Table 9 tests whether or not the importance of these types of orders for price discovery changes with volatility.

Table 9 examines the relationship between stock volatility and contribution to price discovery. The table reports the results from OLS regressions on different components of the variance decomposition components from Table 7. The various ratios of price discovery follow the same logic as the ratios used for message frequencies in Table 8. Observations are at the stock-day and volatility, market capitalization, and inverse price remain the same.

# INSERT TABLE 9 ABOUT HERE

Mechanically the numerator in the variance decomposition is the product of the variance of the surprise/innovation of the order flow and the squared price impact of an order (IRF). This suggests that if a certain type of order is submitted less frequently (or less unexpectedly) that the contribution to price discovery by that type of order should fall. However, average price impacts and the innovation component of orders may both vary with volatility. Table 9 shows, consistent with theory, that limit orders do contribute less to price discovery as volatility increases. The contribution to price discovery of limit orders falls by $1 . 0 4 \%$ per $1 \%$ increase in previous day volatility. Also consistent with the frequency results of Table 8, we find that the decrease in the explanatory power of limit orders is driven by a decrease in HFT limit order contribution to price discovery. For example, HFT limit orders make up $1 . 3 1 \%$ less of the total variance explained per $1 \%$ increase in previous daily volatility. The contribution to price discovery by non-HFT does not appear to vary with volatility.

# III. Activity and Price Discovery within and across Markets

The market-wide price discovery analysis in Tables 4-7 shows that HFTs’ limit orders are the primary channel through which price discovery occurs. This section first studies HFT price discovery across exchanges. We first ask whether HFTs’ role in price discovery is concentrated on the new exchanges or is similar across the three largest exchanges. Second we study the potential cross-exchange sources of information by extending Tables 4-7 to examine how HFTs and non-HFT respond to trading and orders within and across markets.29 Finally, we examine directly how price changes migrate across exchanges.

Table 10 decomposes the order activity by participant type and order type relative to the NBBO for each exchange. Most activity is concentrated at the best bid and offer (BBO) across all three exchanges.

# INSERT TABLE 10 ABOUT HERE

Exchange 2 is the largest of the three Canadian exchanges. The activity breakdown in terms of order type participant frequencies across exchanges is comparable with the exception of exchange 3 where HFT are responsible for $7 5 \%$ of activity versus $48 \%$ and $41 \%$ for exchanges 1 and 2 respectively. That HFTs are more active on smaller exchanges is consistent with Menvkveld (2013) highlighting the importance of HFTs for smaller and newer exchanges. Roughly half of the activity is better than or at the best prices for all three exchanges.

Tables 4-5 show that HFTs’ new limit orders are the primary channel for price discovery. The analyses are in event time, which does not account for possibly very small time differences in between when HFTs and non-HFTs incorporate new information. For example, if a public information event, e.g., the S&P 500 futures price (or the TSX 60 ETF price) increasing leads to both HFTs’ and non-HFTs’ buy limit order submissions with HFTs being slightly faster, event time analysis will attribute all price discovery to HFTs. A standard approach to price discovery in calendar time is Hasbrouck’s (1995) information shares. Most commonly this is done by examining quotes in different markets for the same security, e.g., Huang (2002). This can be directly extended to the best quotes by different market participants. The information shares approach decomposes variation in the common efficient price into individual components attributable to specific markets or participants.

The information share methodology focuses on innovations in different groups’ prices (quote midpoints). The information share of a group is measured as that group’s contribution to the total variance of the common (random-walk) component. We calculate the price path for each group (HFT/nHFT or Exchange); denote the price vector $p _ { t }$ representing the prevailing prices for each group i as $p _ { t } ^ { i } = m _ { t } + \epsilon _ { t } ^ { i }$ . The prices are assumed covariance stationary. The common efficient price path is the random walk process, $m _ { t } = m _ { t - 1 } + u _ { t }$ where $E ( u _ { t } ) = 0 , E ( u ^ { 2 } t ) = \sigma _ { u . } ^ { 2 }$ , and $E ( u _ { t } u _ { s } ) = 0$ for $t \neq s$ . The price process vector can be modeled as a VMA:

$$
\Delta p _ { t } = \varepsilon _ { t } + \psi _ { 1 } \varepsilon _ { t - 1 } + \psi _ { 2 } \varepsilon _ { t - 2 } \mathsf { K } \ ,
$$

where $\epsilon$ is a vector of innovations with a zero mean and a variance matrix of $\Omega , \Psi$ represents the polynomial in the lag operator. The information share is:

$$
I n f o s h a r e _ { j } = \frac { \Psi _ { j } ^ { 2 } \Omega _ { j } } { \Psi \Omega \Psi ^ { \prime } }
$$

InfoSharej is interpreted as the fraction of price discovery attributable to participant (or exchange) $j ;$ the numerator is the variance of the efficient price attributable to participant $j ;$ and the denominator is the total variance of the efficient price. As discussed in Hasbrouck (1995), when multiple series move at the same time the information share cannot be uniquely attributed to any series. In our setting this occurs if both the HFTs’ and non-HFTs’ prices move at the same time. Information shares are typically estimated at a fixed sampling frequency. Higher sampling frequencies allow for price discovery to be more uniquely attributed to HFTs and non-HFTs, but also attributes price discovery occurring close together to the faster participant group, presumably HFTs. To balance this tradeoff we estimate information shares at a one-second frequency.

Table 11 reports the information shares for HFTs and non-HFTs. As with the VARs in Tables 4-5, information shares are estimated for each stock on each day. Table 11 provides the average maximum and minimum information shares. Table 11 reports whether the average minimum HFT information share is statistically significantly greater than the average maximum non-HFT information share. Testing the minimum HFT against the maximum non-HFT shows whether the HFT limit order price discovery results in Tables 4 and Table 6 and 7 are simply due to HFTs updating their quotes faster than non-HFTs.

# INSERT TABLE 11 ABOUT HERE

Table 11 Panel A shows that the average 59 percent minimum information share for HFTs is statistically significantly greater than the 41 percent maximum value for non-HFT. This demonstrates that even with conservative timing assumptions HFT limit order activity contributes more to price discovery than non-HFT activity. The HFT maximum information share attributes all the common innovations in price discovery within the same second to HFTs and shows HFTs providing 81 percent of price discovery. Thus, 22 percent of the price discovery occurs within the same second for HFTs and non-HFTs.

Panels B and C of Table 11 extend the aggregate information share price discovery analysis in Panel A to prices from the different exchanges. Panel B calculates information shares by exchange. All exchanges contribute to price discovery. Exchange 1 has the highest minimum and maximum information shares. The wide gap between the maximum and minimum exchange information shares suggests that price discovery is well integrated across markets as significant common price discovery occurs across exchanges within one second.

Panel C of Table 11 breaks the information shares down by exchange and participant type. HFT are responsible for at least $56 \%$ of information on every exchange and at most $93 \%$ on exchange 3. HFT are responsible for the least price discovery on the largest exchange, although still responsible for more price discovery on that exchange than non-HFTs. The results of Table 11 suggest that HFTs information advantages are not primarily driven by differences across exchanges, e.g., exchange specific HFT friendly order types. Table 11 also suggests that HFTs’ orders moving prices more than non-HFTs’ orders is not only explained by their being marginally faster than non-HFTs as these information shares can mitigate very small speed advantages.

Next we study the potential cross-exchange sources of information. A source of HFT information could be activity in other markets. In Table 5 we show that HFT are more responsive to overall activity than are non-HFTs. Table 12 extends the VAR in Tables 4-5 to capture order activity by HFTs and non-HFTs on the same and different exchanges. This is done by indexing all trade and order variables by exchange. Thus, there are 10 order variables on each of the three exchanges for both HFTs and non-HFTs, making a system of 61 equations and variables. As before we estimate the VAR for each stock each day and report stock-day averages.

Table 12 provides the trade and order IRFs from the above-described VAR.30 To avoid presenting all the possible cross exchange IRFs we do not report the coefficients on variables that are 1 tick or more away from the NBBO. Also, we group together IRFs for same and other exchanges. The same exchange IRFs are the across exchange average response of each variable to the variables on that exchange. For example, the same exchange HFT trade response to an HFT trade is the average of the IRFs for an HFT trade on exchange 1 response to an HFT trade on exchange 1, an HFT trade on exchange 2 response to an HFT trade on exchange 2, and an HFT trade on exchange 3 response to an HFT trade on exchange 3. The other exchange IRFs is the across exchange average response of each variable to the variables on other exchanges. For example, the other exchange HFT trade response to an HFT trade is the average of the IRFs for an HFT trade on exchange 1 response to an HFT trade on exchanges 2 and 3, an HFT trade on exchange 2 response to an HFT trade on exchanges 1 and 3, and an HFT trade on exchange 3 response to an HFT trade on exchanges 1 and 2. Panel A reports the average IRFs for the same exchange. Panel B reports the average IRFs for the other exchanges.

# INSERT TABLE 12 ABOUT HERE

The results presented in Panel A of Table 12 are consistent with those presented in Table 5. Similar to Table 5 summing the coefficients for HFT events and response combinations provides insight into how HFT and non-HFT activity precedes and responds to particular events. For instance summing the upper left quadrant of Table 12 Panel A, shows that HFTs response to HFT activity is 3.65 basis points. Summing the absolute value of the lower right quadrant shows that non-HFTs response is 1.62 basis to non-HFT activity.

There is a strong diagonal effect and HFTs respond more to market activity, in the same direction, than do non-HFTs. There are differences in how the same and other market activity precede HFT and non-HFT activity in the same direction. For HFTs, same market activity precedes more same market activity in the same direction than does other market activity. For non-HFTs other market activity precedes more activity in the same direction than does same market activity. This could arise from some non-HFTs’ algorithms splitting large orders across markets.

Finally, we focus directly how price changes migrate across exchanges. Prices changing across multiple exchanges are notable events when examining the role of HFTs’ and non-HFTs’ orders in cross-market price discovery. While these are only a small portion of activity, they allow for straightforward study of which orders initiate and finish the cross-market price changes. Table 13 examines message sequences where exchanges 2 and 3 start with the same best bid or offer price and both exchanges revise their bid/offer in the same direction. We focus on exchanges 2 and 3 in this analysis as these are the two largest exchanges by volume.31 The initial message that causes the two exchanges to go from the same price to different prices is referred to as the first message and the subsequent message on the second exchange which causes its price to move is referred to as the second message. Table 13 provides insight into the sequence of messages that result in common price discovery across the two exchanges. The first message does not need to immediately precede the second message. Table 13 reports the frequencies of message sequences where the price changes on the two exchanges do not occur simultaneously (not in the same millisecond).

# INSERT TABLE 13 ABOUT HERE

Because Table 13 studies when both exchanges’ prices move in the same direction, not all message sequences are possible. For example, after a trade consumes all the liquidity available at the best price on one exchange the price on the same side of the market can only change in the same direction on the other exchange due to a trade or an order cancelation. Because there are fewer sequence possibilities Table 13 reports joint frequencies/probabilities.

The results show that HFT are responsible for initiating price changes that cross exchanges more often than non-HFTs. HFTs are also responsible for closing these price changes. In that HFT facilitate price discovery across markets the results are consistent with those previously presented on HFTs important role in price discovery.

# IV. Conclusion

The traditional view of price discovery is that trades reveal investors’ private information while maker makers’ quotes reflect public information. Most stock exchanges and financial markets are now limit order books without designated market makers. The market/limit order choice by informed and uninformed investors determines the nature of price discovery and adverse selection.

Using regulatory data identifying limit orders and trades by HFTs and non-HFTs we study the role of each in price discovery and test theoretical predictions of limit-order-book models. HFTs’ market orders play a small role in price discovery while HFTs’ limit orders play a large role. The widely stated concern of HFTs’ market orders adversely selecting non-HFTs’ limit orders plays a small role in price discovery. In addition, we find little evidence that HFTs use their speed advantage to “front run” non-HFTs’ orders. While these types of problematic behavior do not represent the majority of HFTs’ activity, this does not imply that HFTs never adversely select non-HFTs or quasi-front run their orders.

Consistent with theoretical limit-order-book models, we find that price discovery switches from limit to market orders when volatility increases and that this change is due to HFTs. Volatility typically directly decreases market stability and HFTs change in behavior could exacerbate the impact of volatility. A natural regulatory response to increase market stability could be to restrict HFTs’ ability to demand liquidity when volatility increases. However, this could interfere with HFTs’ risk management practices. In addition, identifying and regulating specific market participants is challenging. Often incentives, such are reduced trading fees or privileges, are needed for traders to self identify. How to induce traders to produce the socially optimal level of market stability by continuing to provide liquidity via limit orders in stressful market conditions is an important topic for future research.

References   
Anand, A., Chakravarty, S. and Martell, T., 2005. Empirical evidence on the evolution of liquidity: Choice of market versus limit orders by informed and uninformed traders. Journal of Financial Markets 8(3): 288-308.   
Bacidore, J., and Sofianos, G., 2002. Liquidity provision and specialist trading in NYSE-listed non-US stocks. Journal of Financial Economics 63(1): 133-158.   
Baldauf, M. and Mollner, J., 2016. Fast traders make a quick buck: The role of speed in liquidity provision. Working Paper.   
Biais, B., Foucault, T. and Moinas, S., 2015. Equilibrium fast trading. Journal of Financial Economics 116(2): 292-313.   
Biais, B., Hillion, P. and Spatt, C., 1995. An empirical analysis of the limit order book and the order flow in the Paris Bourse. Journal of Finance 50(5): 1655–1689.   
Bloomfield, R., O’hara, M. and Saar, G., 2005. The “make or take” decision in an electronic market: Evidence on the evolution of liquidity. Journal of Financial Economics 75(1): 165- 199.   
Brogaard, J., Hendershott, T. and Riordan, R., 2014. High frequency trading and price discovery. Review of Financial Studies 27(8): 2267-2306.   
Brogaard, J., Hendershott, T. and Riordan, R., 2017. High frequency trading and the 2008 short sale ban. Journal of Financial Economics 124(1): 22-42.   
Budish, E., Cramton, P. and Shim, J., 2015. The high-frequency trading arms race: Frequent batch auctions as a market design response. Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(4): 1547-1621.   
Cao, C., Hansch, O. and Wang, X., 2009. The information content of an open limit order book. Journal of Futures Markets 29(1): 16-41.   
Chaboud, A., Chiquoine, B., Hjalmarsson, E. and Vega, C., 2014. Rise of the machines: Algorithmic trading in the foreign exchange market. Journal of Finance 69(5): 2045-2084.   
Chordia, T., Green, T. and Kottimukkalur, B., 2015. Do high frequency traders need to be regulated? Evidence from algorithmic trading on macro news. Working Paper.   
Collin-Dufresne, P., and Fos, V., 2015. Do prices reveal the presence of informed trading? Journal of Finance 70(4): 1555-1582.   
Conrad, J., Wahal, S. and Xiang, J., 2015. High-frequency quoting, trading, and the efficiency of prices. Journal of Financial Economics 116(2): 271-291.   
Cont, R., Kukanov, A. and Stoikov, S., 2014. The price impact of order book events. Journal of Financial Econometrics 12(1): 47-88.

Danielsson, J., Shin, H. and Zigrand, JP., 2012. Endogenous extreme events and the dual role of prices. Annual Review of Economics 4: 111-129.

Engelberg, J., Reed, A. and Ringgenberg, M., 2012. How are shorts informed?: Short sellers, news, and information processing. Journal of Financial Economics 105(2): 260-278.

Fleming, M., Mizrach, B. and Nguyen, G., 2017. The microstructure of a US treasury ECN: The brokertec platform. Journal of Financial Markets, forthcoming.

Foucault, T., Hombert, J. and Rosu, I., 2015. News trading and speed. Journal of Finance 71(1): 335–382.

Foucault, T., Kozhan, R. and Tham, W., 2017. Toxic arbitrage. Review of Financial Studies 30(4): 1053–1094.

Foucault, T., 1999. Order flow composition and trading costs in a dynamic limit order market. Journal of Financial Markets 2(2): 99-134.

Glosten, L., and Milgrom, P., 1985. Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders. Journal of Financial Economics 14(1): 71-100.

Goettler, R., Parlour, C. and Rajan, U., 2009. Informed traders and limit order markets. Journal of Financial Economics 93(1): 67-87.

Hasbrouck, J., 1991a. Measuring the information content of stock trades. Journal of Finance 46(1): 179–207.

Hasbrouck, J., 1991b. The summary informativeness of stock trades: An econometric analysis. Review of Financial Studies 4(3): 571–595.

Hasbrouck, J., 1995. One security, many markets: Determining the contributions to price discovery. Journal of Finance 50(4): 1175–1199.

Hautsch, N., and Huang, R., 2012. The market impact of a limit order. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 36(4): 501-522.

Hirschey, N., 2017. Do high-frequency traders anticipate buying and selling pressure? Working Paper.

Hoffmann, P., 2014. A dynamic limit order market with fast and slow traders. Journal of Financial Economics 113(1): 156-169.

Huang, R., 2002. The quality of ECN and nasdaq market maker quotes. Journal of Finance 57(3): 1285–1319.

Jovanovic, B., and Menkveld, A., 2015. Middlemen in limit-order markets. Working Paper.

Kaniel, R., and Liu, H., 2006. So what orders do informed traders use? Journal of Business 79(4): 1867-1913.

Kirilenko, A., Kyle, A., Samadi, M. and Tuzun, T., 2017. The flash crash: High-frequency trading in an electronic market. Journal of Finance 72(3): 967-998.   
Korajczyk, R. and Murphy, D., 2017. High frequency market making to large institutional trades. Working Paper.   
Kyle, A., 1985. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica 53(6) : 1315-1335.   
Madhavan, A., 1992. Trading mechanisms in securities markets. Journal of Finance 47(2) : 607- 641.   
Menkveld, A., 2013. High frequency trading and the new market makers. Journal of Financial Markets 16(4): 712-740.   
Rosu, I., 2015. Fast and slow informed trading. Working Paper.   
Thompson, S., 2011. Simple formulas for standard errors that cluster by both firm and time. Journal of Financial Economics 99(1): 1–10.   
van Kervel, V. and Menkveld, A., 2017. High-frequency trading around large institutional orders. Working Paper.   
Zhu, H., 2013. Do dark pools harm price discovery? Review of Financial Studies 27(3): 747-789.

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics. The table reports summary statistics for the 15 non-cross-listed stocks in the TSX 60. The sample period is from 10/15/2012 to 06/28/2013. Ticker is the ticker. Market Cap. is the average market capitalization from Datastream, in billions of Canadian dollars. Share Price is the average traded stock price. Trade Size is the average trade size in dollars. Number of Trades is the average number of trades, in thousands. Number of Shares Traded is the average number of shares traded, in thousands. Dollar Volume Traded is the number of shares traded multiplied by the stock price, in millions of dollars. NBBO Quoted Half-Spread is the calendar time weighted one-half quoted difference between the national best bid and the national best ask price, in basis points. % HFT is the double-sided dollar-volume $\%$ of trades by a high frequency trader (HFT). % HFT Demand is the dollar-volume percent of trades in which an HFT is the liquidity taker. $\%$ HFT Supply is the dollar-volume percent of trades in which an HFT is the liquidity provider. Std. Dev. of Returns is the standard deviation of the daily returns for the stock, in percent.

<table><tr><td colspan="4">Market Cap.</td><td rowspan="2">Number of Trades</td><td rowspan="2">Number of Shares</td><td rowspan="2">Dollar Voolume</td><td rowspan="2">NBBO Quoted Half- pread</td><td colspan="4"></td></tr><tr><td>Ticker</td><td>Share ($ Price billion)</td><td>Trade Size</td><td>TTraded o)</td><td>Traded ($ million)</td><td>% HFT</td><td>% HFT Demand</td><td>Std. Dev. % HFT of SSupply Returns</td></tr><tr><td>ARX</td><td>$8.00</td><td>$25.59</td><td>$4,854</td><td>5.47</td><td>(&#x27;00o) 1,053.84</td><td>$26.91</td><td>(bps) 2.72</td><td>21.6%</td><td>15.0%</td><td>28.1%</td><td>(%) 1.23</td></tr><tr><td>ATD.B</td><td>$10.03</td><td>$53.40</td><td>$10,517</td><td>2.28</td><td>446.81</td><td>$24.03</td><td>4.07</td><td>17.4%</td><td>22.9%</td><td>12.0%</td><td>1.17</td></tr><tr><td>BBD.B</td><td>$6.95</td><td>$4.00</td><td>$4,875</td><td>10.14</td><td>12,697.71</td><td>$50.42</td><td>12.64</td><td>30.1%</td><td>19.5%</td><td>40.6%</td><td>2.00</td></tr><tr><td>COS</td><td>$9.90</td><td>$20.43</td><td>$4,765</td><td>9.13</td><td>2,129.80</td><td>$43.52</td><td>2.52</td><td>24.9%</td><td>14.4%</td><td>35.4%</td><td>1.27</td></tr><tr><td>CTC.A</td><td>$6.77</td><td>$72.35</td><td>$14,821</td><td>1.67</td><td>343.34</td><td>$25.12</td><td>4.37</td><td>15.3%</td><td>19.1%</td><td>11.6%</td><td>1.51</td></tr><tr><td>FM</td><td>$10.95</td><td>$19.77</td><td>$5,383</td><td>13.41</td><td>3,656.19</td><td>$70.97</td><td>2.92</td><td>18.4%</td><td>14.2%</td><td>22.7%</td><td>2.71</td></tr><tr><td>FTS</td><td>$6.96</td><td>$33.63</td><td>$6,943</td><td>3.91</td><td>791.23</td><td>$26.52</td><td>1.84</td><td>23.5%</td><td>13.9%</td><td>33.2%</td><td>0.77</td></tr><tr><td>HSE</td><td>$28.74</td><td>$29.24</td><td>$6,307</td><td>7.28</td><td>1,545.42</td><td>$45.27</td><td>2.18</td><td>24.4%</td><td>19.0%</td><td>29.8%</td><td>1.28</td></tr><tr><td>L</td><td>$11.62</td><td>$41.10</td><td>$9,738</td><td>2.99</td><td>783.63</td><td>$33.09</td><td>2.89</td><td>12.1%</td><td>11.4%</td><td>12.8%</td><td>1.56</td></tr><tr><td>MRU</td><td>$1.95</td><td>$52.49</td><td>$10,175</td><td>2.11</td><td>3.97</td><td>$20.87</td><td>4.11</td><td>16.1%</td><td>16.6%</td><td>15.6%</td><td>0.85</td></tr><tr><td>NA</td><td>$12.46</td><td>$76.46</td><td>$14,217</td><td>4.31</td><td>797.08</td><td>$60.71</td><td>1.38</td><td>21.4%</td><td>18.7%</td><td>24.1%</td><td>0.62</td></tr><tr><td>POW</td><td>$12.10</td><td>$26.28</td><td>$6,210</td><td>5.25</td><td>1,224.45</td><td>$32.39</td><td>2.17</td><td>23.0%</td><td>14.4%</td><td>31.6%</td><td>0.92</td></tr><tr><td>SAP</td><td>$9.61</td><td>$48.92</td><td>$11,088</td><td>1.99</td><td>421.56</td><td>$20.79</td><td>3.81</td><td>20.3%</td><td>23.0%</td><td>17.7%</td><td>0.97</td></tr><tr><td>SNC</td><td>$6.45</td><td>$42.50 $72.98</td><td>$10,066</td><td>3.22</td><td>756.68 160.60</td><td>$32.31 $11.84</td><td>3.70</td><td>14.4%</td><td>16.4%</td><td>12.3%</td><td>1.54</td></tr><tr><td>WN</td><td>$9.35</td><td></td><td>$12,766</td><td>0.91</td><td></td><td></td><td>5.77</td><td>15.8%</td><td>22.2%</td><td>9.5%</td><td>1.08</td></tr><tr><td>Average</td><td>$10.12</td><td>$41.28</td><td>$11,637</td><td>4.94</td><td>1,787.49</td><td>$34.98</td><td>3.81</td><td>19.9%</td><td>17.4%</td><td>22.5%</td><td>1.30</td></tr></table>

Table 2: Trader Type Statistics. The table reports stock-day-participant (HFT and non-HFT) average; trading, orders, and positions for individual HFT and non-HFTs for the 15 non-crosslisted stocks in the TSX 60. The sample period is from 10/15/2012 to 06/28/2013. Number of Messages is the number of orders, order cancels, and order amends a trader conducts. Number of Trades is the number of trades (marketable orders) conducted by a trader. Number of Shares Traded is the number of shares traded by a trader. Dollar Volume (DV) Traded is the number of shares traded by a trader multiplied by the share price. Message to Trade Ratio is the number of messages deployed for each trade by a trader. DV Traded / Total DV Traded is the dollar volume traded by a trader scaled by the total dollar volume traded on that stock-day. $A b s ( E o D I n v . ) / D V$ Traded is the absolute value of a trader’s end of day dollar-volume inventory scaled by that trader’s dollar-volume traded. Abs(Max Intra. Inv.)/DV Traded is the trader’s absolute value of the maximum intraday dollar-volume inventory position scaled by that trader’s dollar-volume traded. $\%$ of days with Abs(EoD Inv) / DV Traded $< 3 \%$ is the percent of stock-day-trader observations with the $A b s ( E o D I n v . ) / D V$ Traded is less than $3 \%$ . Average DV Trade Size is the average dollar volume size of a trade. Number of Participants is the average number of traders in each stock each day.

<table><tr><td rowspan="3">Number of Messages (thousand) Number of Trades</td><td>HFT</td><td>non-HFT</td></tr><tr><td>4.45</td><td>0.29</td></tr><tr><td>239.58</td><td>41.05</td></tr><tr><td>Number of Shares Traded (thousand)</td><td>68.96</td><td>17.44</td></tr><tr><td>Dollar Volume (DV) Traded ($million)</td><td>$1.03</td><td>$0.35</td></tr><tr><td>Messages to Trade Ratio</td><td>64.74</td><td>27.01</td></tr><tr><td>Number of Messages / Total Messages</td><td>2.81%</td><td>0.21%</td></tr><tr><td>DV Traded / Total DV Traded</td><td>1.51%</td><td>0.46%</td></tr><tr><td>Abs(EoD Inv) / DV Traded</td><td>10.68%</td><td>69.82%</td></tr><tr><td>Abs(Max Intra. Inv.) / DV Traded</td><td>17.99%</td><td>79.63%</td></tr><tr><td>% of days with Abs(EoD Inv)/DV Traded &lt; 3%</td><td>50.21%</td><td>6.64%</td></tr><tr><td>Average DV Trade Size</td><td>$5,663.56</td><td>$37,531.60</td></tr><tr><td>Number of Participants</td><td>13.06</td><td>185.36</td></tr></table>

Table 3: Message Frequency. The table reports the frequency of orders by type-aggressiveness broken down by participant for the 15 non-cross-listed stocks in the TSX 60. The sample period is from 10/15/2012 to 06/28/2013. It considers all messages on the three exchanges by HFT and non-HFT that are Trades, Orders, or Order Cancels. Trade - Change Price captures trades that consume liquidity beyond the NBBO. Trade - Same Price captures trades that do not consume liquidity beyond the NBBO. Improving Order captures orders that move the NBBO. Order Placement at NBBO captures of orders at the NBBO. Order 1 tick from NBBO captures orders one cent away from the NBBO. Order $> 1$ tick from NBBO captures orders more than one cent away from the NBBO. For cancels the analogous definition applies. Total $\#$ of Observations, is the number of observations on all three exchanges on the average stock-day.

<table><tr><td rowspan="5">Trade - Change Price Trade - Same Price Improving Order Worsening Cancel</td><td>HFT</td><td>non-HFT</td></tr><tr><td>0.21%</td><td>0.28%</td></tr><tr><td>0.76%</td><td>3.40%</td></tr><tr><td>2.15%</td><td>1.29%</td></tr><tr><td>0.89%</td><td>0.63%</td></tr><tr><td>Order Placement at NBBO</td><td>14.88%</td><td>8.45%</td></tr><tr><td>Order Cancel at NBBO</td><td>12.42%</td><td>5.44%</td></tr><tr><td>Order 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>3.85%</td><td>1.55%</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>4.61%</td><td>2.56%</td></tr><tr><td>Order &gt; 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>6.33%</td><td>9.88%</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel &gt; 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>7.33%</td><td>13.09%</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total # of Observations</td><td>72,466</td><td></td></tr></table>

Table 4: Return Impulse Response Function. The table reports stock-day average return Impulse Response Functions (IRFs) from a vector-autoregression (VAR) for the 15 non-crosslisted stocks in the TSX 60. The sample period is from 10/15/2012 to 06/28/2013. There is one equation for each of the variables listed in the table, for each HFT and non-HFT, and the midpoint NBBO midpoint return. The VAR is in event time where every message is an observation. Trade - Change Price takes the value $\mathbf { + 1 }$ for buy initiated trades (sell initiated trades, -1, are defined analogously) that consume all depth at the NBO. Trade - Same Price takes the value $\mathbf { + 1 }$ for buy initiated trades that do not consume all depth at the NBO. Improving Order take $^ { + 1 }$ (-1) for bids (offers) placed inside the NBB (NBO). Order Placement at NBBO take $^ { + 1 }$ for bids placed at the NBB, $\mathbf { - 1 }$ for offers placed at the NBO, and 0 otherwise. Order 1 tick from NBBO take $^ { + 1 }$ for bids placed at one cent from the NBB, -1 for offers placed at one cent from the NBO, and 0 otherwise. Order $> 1$ tick from NBBO take $^ { + 1 }$ for bids placed greater than one cent from the NBB, -1 for offers placed at greater than one cent from the NBO, and 0 otherwise. For cancels the analogous definition applies with the sign such that cancels at the bid take the value $\mathbf { - 1 }$ and cancels at the offer take the value $^ { + 1 }$ . The observations include all displayed messages between 9:45 a.m. EST and $3 { : } 4 5 \ \mathrm { p . m }$ . EST. The IRF is cumulative over 20 events. For HFT and non-HFT a \*, \*\* next to the coefficient represents that the coefficient differs from zero and is statistical significance at the 5 and $1 \%$ level, respectively using standard errors clustered by stock and by day. For the Difference column \*, \*\* next to the coefficient represents that the HFT and non-HFT coefficients differs from each other with statistical significance at the 5 and $1 \%$ level, respectively using standard errors clustered by stock and by day.

<table><tr><td></td><td>HFT</td><td>non-HFT</td><td>Difference</td></tr><tr><td>Trade - Change price</td><td>3.25**</td><td>2.99**</td><td>0.26**</td></tr><tr><td>Trade - Same Price</td><td>1.00**</td><td>0.72**</td><td>0.28**</td></tr><tr><td>Improving Order</td><td>1.56**</td><td>1.12**</td><td>0.44**</td></tr><tr><td>Worsening Cancel</td><td>2.00**</td><td>2.20**</td><td>-0.20**</td></tr><tr><td>Order Placement at NBBO</td><td>0.17**</td><td>0.14**</td><td>0.03**</td></tr><tr><td>Order Cancel at NBBO</td><td>0.01**</td><td>-0.03**</td><td>0.04**</td></tr><tr><td>Order 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>0.03**</td><td>0.04**</td><td>-0.01**</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>0.01**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>0.02**</td></tr><tr><td>Order &gt; 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>-0.11**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.10**</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel &gt; 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.01**</td></tr></table>

Table 5: Message Impulse Response Function. The table reports stock-day average message Impulse Response Functions (IRFs) from the vector-autoregressions (VAR) in Table 4 for the 15 non-cross-listed stocks in the TSX 60. The sample period is from 10/15/2012 to 06/28/2013. The VAR is in event time where every message is an observation. The rows represent the variable being shocked by one unit. The columns represent the variable being affected. Trade ΔNBBO HFT (non-HFT) takes the value $^ { + 1 }$ for buy initiated trades (sell initiated trades, $\mathbf { - 1 }$ , are defined analogously) that consume all depth at the NBO. Trade NBBO HFT (non-HFT) takes the value $^ { + 1 }$ for buy initiated trades that do not consume all depth at the NBO. Order ΔNBBO HFT (non-HFT) take $^ { + 1 }$ (-1) for bids (offers) placed inside the NBB (NBO). Order NBBO HFT (non-HFT) take $^ { + 1 }$ for bids placed at the NBB, -1 for offers placed at the NBO, and 0 otherwise. For cancels the analogous definition applies with the sign such that cancels at the bid take the value -1 and cancels at the offer take the value $^ { + 1 }$ . The observations include all displayed messages between 9:45 a.m. EST and 3:45 p.m. EST. The IRF is cumulative over 20 events. For HFT and non-HFT a \*, \*\* next to the coefficient represents that the coefficient differs from zero and is statistical significance at the 5 and $1 \%$ level, respectively using standard errors clustered by stock and by day. For the Difference column \*, \*\* next to the coefficient represents that the HFT and non-HFT coefficients differs from each other with statistical significance at the 5 and $1 \%$ level, respectively using standard errors clustered by stock and by day.

<table><tr><td></td><td>Trade ΔNBBO HFT</td><td>Trade NBBO HFT</td><td>Order ΔNBBO HFT</td><td>Cancel NBBO HFT</td><td>Order NBBO HFT</td><td>Cancel NBBO HFT</td><td>Trade ΔNBBO non-</td><td>Trade NBBO non-</td><td>Order ΔNBBO non-</td><td>Cancel ΔNBBO non-</td><td>Order NBO non-</td><td>Cancel NBBO non-</td></tr><tr><td>Variable Trade ΔNBBO HFT</td><td>0.00</td><td>0.08**</td><td>0.48**</td><td>-0.00</td><td>0.92**</td><td>-0.05**</td><td>HFT -0.01**</td><td>HFT -0.07**</td><td>HFT 0.01**</td><td>HFT 0.00**</td><td>HFT 0.12**</td><td>HFT 0.04**</td></tr><tr><td>Trade NBBO HFT</td><td>0.17**</td><td>1.20**</td><td>0.40**</td><td>-0.00</td><td>0.54**</td><td>-0.12**</td><td>0.00*</td><td>-0.02**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.08**</td><td>0.00*</td></tr><tr><td>Order ΔNBBO HFT</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.05**</td><td>0.22**</td><td>-0.09**</td><td>0.65**</td><td>0.04**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>-0.02**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>-0.00</td><td>0.18**</td><td>0.07**</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel ΔNBBO HFT</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.02**</td><td>-0.15**</td><td>0.06**</td><td>-0.20**</td><td>0.13**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.09**</td><td>-0.08**</td><td>0.03**</td><td>-0.03**</td><td>0.07**</td></tr><tr><td>Order NBBO HFT</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.08**</td><td>-0.00</td><td>0.59**</td><td>-0.34**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.13**</td><td>-0.01**</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel NBBO HFT</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>-0.10**</td><td>0.06**</td><td>-0.18**</td><td>0.50**</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>-0.02**</td><td>0.05**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>0.07**</td></tr><tr><td>Trade ΔNBBO non-HFT</td><td>0.00**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>0.37**</td><td>-0.00</td><td>0.86**</td><td>0.08**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>0.07**</td><td>0.03**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.09**</td><td>0.03**</td></tr><tr><td>Trade NBBO non-HFT</td><td>0.03**</td><td>0.12**</td><td>0.27**</td><td>-0.00</td><td>0.64**</td><td>0.12**</td><td>0.08**</td><td>0.95**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.09**</td><td>0.03**</td></tr><tr><td>Order ΔNBBO non-HFT</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.04**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.37**</td><td>0.15**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.21**</td><td>0.39**</td><td>-0.07**</td><td>0.14**</td><td>0.07**</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel ΔNBBO non-HFT</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.02**</td><td>-0.08**</td><td>0.04**</td><td>-0.04**</td><td>0.25**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.07**</td><td>-0.16**</td><td>0.08**</td><td>-0.20**</td><td>0.11**</td></tr><tr><td>Order NBBO non-HFT</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.05**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.24**</td><td>-0.01</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.00</td><td>0.34**</td><td>-0.31**</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel NBBO non-HFT</td><td>-0.00</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>-0.02**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.03**</td><td>0.13**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.07**</td><td>-0.06**</td><td>0.03**</td><td>-0.32**</td><td>0.29**</td></tr></table>

Table 6: Simple Price Impacts. The table reports averages of OLS regressions on the 10- second signed price impacts (in basis points) for each stock -day on all message that change or are at the NBBO for the 15 non-cross-listed stocks in the TSX 60. The sample period is from 10/15/2012 to 06/28/2013. The first two columns are for Trades, columns 3-4 are for Orders, and columns $5 ^ { - 6 }$ are for Order Cancels. HFT takes the value 1 if an HFT placed the message, and zero otherwise. Order Size is the number of shares in the order. Stock Volatility is the absolute value of the previous 10-second stock return (in percent). XIU Volatility is the absolute value of the previous 10-second return of the TSX 60 exchange traded fund, XIU (in percent). Relative Spread is the stock’s contemporaneous bid-ask spread divided by the midpoint price (in percent). Lag Stock Return (1-10 second) is the signed 10-second lagged stock return (in percent). Lag XIU Return (1-10 second) is the signed 10-second lagged XIU return (in percent). Limit Order Book Imbalance is the stock’s contemporaneous signed limit order book imbalance defined as (depth at best bid price – depth at best ask price) / (depth at best bid price $^ +$ depth at best ask price) for buy messages, and the negative of that value for sell messages. Hidden Order takes the value 1 if the message was a hidden order (or for the Trade analysis was executed against a hidden order), and zero otherwise. Change NBBO is the immediate change (in basis points) in the NBBO because of the message. Order Cancel followed by Order by Same Trader (Opposite Direction) takes the value 1 when the same trader immediately cancels a buy (offer) order followed by a buy (offer) order (or the reverse), and zero otherwise. Order Cancel Followed by Trade by Same Trader (Opposite Direction) takes the value 1 when the same trader immediately cancels a buy (sell) order followed by a buy (sell) trade (or the reverse), and zero otherwise. \*, \*\* next to the coefficient represents that the coefficient differs from zero and is statistical significance at the 5 and $1 \%$ level, respectively using standard errors clustered by stock and by day.

Table 6 Continued   

<table><tr><td rowspan="3">Intercept HFT</td><td colspan="4"></td><td colspan="2">Order Cancel</td></tr><tr><td>Trade 2.38** (0.03)</td><td>Trade 1.79** (0.03)</td><td>Order 0.69** (0.01)</td><td>Order 0.62**</td><td>-0.07**</td><td>Order Cancel -0.02</td></tr><tr><td>1.58**</td><td>0.96**</td><td>0.16**</td><td>(0.03) 0.11**</td><td>(0.01) 0.15**</td><td>(0.04) 0.10**</td></tr><tr><td>Order Size</td><td>(0.04)</td><td>(0.02) 0.86**</td><td>(0.01)</td><td>(0.01) 0.27**</td><td>(0.01)</td><td>(0.01) -0.06**</td></tr><tr><td>Stock Volatility</td><td></td><td>(0.06) -1.30**</td><td></td><td>(0.01) 0.83**</td><td></td><td>(0.01) -0.04</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>(0.20)</td><td></td><td>(0.09)</td><td></td><td>(0.09)</td></tr><tr><td>XIU Volatility</td><td></td><td>-0.43* (0.18)</td><td></td><td>0.09* (0.04)</td><td></td><td>-0.02 (0.06)</td></tr><tr><td>Relative Spread</td><td></td><td>7.75**</td><td></td><td>-1.74**</td><td></td><td>0.39</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Lag Stock Return (1-10 second)</td><td></td><td>(0.43)</td><td></td><td>(0.23)</td><td></td><td>(0.22)</td></tr><tr><td>-5.03** (0.37)</td><td></td><td>-6.28**</td><td></td><td></td><td>-5.51**</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Lag XIU Return (1-10 second)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>(0.29)</td><td></td><td>(0.30)</td></tr><tr><td>1.87**</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.49**</td><td></td><td>0.37**</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Limit Order Book Imbalance</td><td></td><td>(0.20)</td><td></td><td>(0.08)</td><td></td><td>(0.06)</td></tr><tr><td>0.50**</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.24**</td><td></td><td>0.29**</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Hidden Order</td><td></td><td>(0.02)</td><td></td><td>(0.01)</td><td></td><td>(0.01)</td></tr><tr><td>-1.38**</td><td></td><td></td><td>-0.11**</td><td></td><td>-0.12**</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Change NBBO</td><td></td><td>(0.03)</td><td></td><td>(0.01)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>0.42**</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.69**</td><td></td><td>(0.02)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td></td><td>(0.01)</td><td></td><td>(0.01)</td><td></td><td>0.66**</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>(0.01)</td></tr><tr><td>Order Cancel then Order by Same Trader (Opposite Direction)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>-0.37**</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>(0.01)</td></tr><tr><td>Order Cancel then Trade by Same</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trader (Opposite Direction)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>-0.99**</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>(0.04)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

Table 7: Variance Decomposition. The table reports stock-day average variance decomposition from the vector-autoregression (VAR) used in Table 4 for the 15 non-cross-listed stocks in the TSX 60. The sample period is from 10/15/2012 to 06/28/2013.

<table><tr><td></td><td>HFT</td><td>non-HFT</td></tr><tr><td>Trade - Change price</td><td>8.8%</td><td>11.6%</td></tr><tr><td>Trade - Same Price</td><td>3.0%</td><td>6.8%</td></tr><tr><td>Improving Order</td><td>19.6%</td><td>8.2%</td></tr><tr><td>Worsening Cancel</td><td>8.8%</td><td>5.2%</td></tr><tr><td>at NBBO Order</td><td>1.5%</td><td>1.0%</td></tr><tr><td>at NBBO Cancel</td><td>0.2%</td><td>0.1%</td></tr><tr><td>Order 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>0.1%</td><td>0.04%</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>0.1%</td><td>0.04%</td></tr><tr><td>Order &gt; 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>0.1%</td><td>0.04%</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel &gt; 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>0.1%</td><td>0.05%</td></tr></table>

Table 8: Stock Volatility and Message Frequency by HFT and non-HFT and Order Type. The table reports coefficients from pooled OLS regressions on daily message frequencies (as Table 3) for the 15 non-cross-listed stocks in the TSX 60. The sample period is from $\mathbf { 1 0 / 1 5 / 2 0 1 2 }$ to 06/28/2013. % by Limit Order is the percent of messages by limit order book submissions and cancellations. $\%$ by HFT Limit Order is the percent of the limit order book submissions and cancellation by HFTs. % HFT by Limit Order / % HFT is the percent of the HFT limit orders and cancellations by total HFT. $\%$ HFT by Limit Order / % by Limit Order is the $\%$ HFT limit orders normalized by the $\%$ of total limit orders. $\%$ by HFT Limit Order / % by Market Order is the percent of the $\%$ HFT limit orders normalized by the $\%$ of market orders. $\%$ by non-HFT Limit Order is the percent of non-HFT limit orders. $\%$ by non-HFT Limit Order / % non-HFT is the percent of non-HFT limit orders normalized by the $\%$ total non-HFT. The dependent variables are in percent. Stock Volatility $\left( t - 1 \right)$ is the daily absolute return from the previous trading day, in percent. Market Cap is the market capitalization of the stock, in billions. 1/ Price is the reciprocal of the stock price. \*, \*\* next to the coefficient represents that the coefficient differs from zero and is statistical significance at the 5 and $1 \%$ level, respectively using standard errors clustered by stock and by day.

<table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td rowspan="2">% by Limit Order</td><td colspan="4">% by HFT</td><td rowspan="2">% by non- HFT Limit Order</td><td rowspan="2">% by non- HFT Limit Order / % non-HFT</td></tr><tr><td>% by HFT Limit Order</td><td>% by HFT Limit Order / % HFT</td><td>% by HFT Limit Order / % by Limit Order</td><td>Market Order / % Market</td></tr><tr><td>Intercept</td><td>95.59**</td><td>43.68**</td><td>96.43**</td><td>45.37**</td><td>Order 25.43**</td><td>51.92**</td><td>93.72**</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Stock Volatility (t- 1</td><td>(0.17)</td><td>(0.81)</td><td>(0.19)</td><td>(0.82)</td><td>(0.64)</td><td>(0.75)</td><td>(0.31)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>-3.40**</td><td>-0.85**</td><td>-3.08**</td><td>1.08*</td><td>2.41**</td><td>-0.40</td></tr><tr><td>-0.99**</td><td>(0.67)</td><td>(0.16)</td><td>(0.73)</td><td>(0.48)</td><td>(0.68)</td><td>(0.34)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Market Cap</td><td>(0.16) -0.11**</td><td>0.62**</td><td>0.05**</td><td>0.73**</td><td>-0.23**</td><td>-0.72**</td><td>-0.36**</td></tr><tr><td>(0.01)</td><td>(0.03)</td><td>(0.01)</td><td>(0.03)</td><td>(0.02)</td><td>(0.03)</td><td>(0.02)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">1 / Price</td><td>-52.31**</td><td>25.15**</td><td>-8.90**</td><td>58.99**</td><td>-36.67**</td><td>-77.46**</td><td>-96.72**</td></tr><tr><td>(1.38)</td><td>(4.63)</td><td>(1.92)</td><td>(4.75)</td><td>(5.36)</td><td>(3.93)</td><td>(2.24)</td></tr></table>

Table 9: Stock Volatility and Percentage of Price Discovery by HFT and non-HFT and Order Type. The table reports the coefficient from pooled OLS regressions on the different components of the daily variance decomposition (from Table 7) for the 15 noncross-listed stocks in the TSX 60. The sample period is from 10/15/2012 to 06/28/2013. % by Limit Order is the percent of the efficient price explained by limit orders (cancellations and submissions) normalized by the fraction of explained variance from the variance decomposition. % by HFT Limit Order is the percent of the variance decomposition estimates explained by HFT limit orders normalized by the explained variance. $\%$ by HFT Limit Order / % HFT is the percent of the variance decomposition estimates explained by HFT limit orders normalized by the $\%$ HFT explained. $\%$ by HFT Limit Order / % by Limit Order is the percent of the variance decomposition estimates explained by HFT limit orders normalized by the $\%$ explained by limit orders. $\%$ by HFT Limit Order / $\%$ by Market Order is the percent of the variance decomposition estimates explained by HFT limit orders normalized by the $\%$ explained by market orders. $\%$ by non-HFT Limit Order is the percent of the variance decomposition estimates explained by non-HFT limit orders normalized by the explained variance. $\%$ by non-HFT Limit Order / $\%$ non-HFT is the percent of the variance decomposition estimates explained by non-HFT limit orders normalized by the $\%$ explained by non-HFT. An observation is a stock-day. Stock Volatility (t-1) is the daily absolute return from the previous trading day, in percent. Market Cap is the market capitalization of the stock, in billions. 1/ Price is the reciprocal of the stock price. \*, \*\* next to the coefficient represents that the coefficient differs from zero and is statistical significance at the 5 and $1 \%$ level, respectively using standard errors clustered by stock and by day.

<table><tr><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="4">% by % by HFT % by HFT</td><td rowspan="2">% by non-HFT Limit % by non- Order / HFT Limit % non-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>% by Limit Order</td><td>% by HFT Limit Order</td><td>HFT Limit Order / % HFT</td><td>Limit Order / % by Limit</td><td>Market Order / % Market Order</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Intercept</td><td>60.48**</td><td>20.68**</td><td>54.19**</td><td>Order 33.65**</td><td>48.21**</td><td>Order HFT 39.79** 71.17**</td></tr><tr><td>(0.91)</td><td>(1.03)</td><td>(1.29)</td><td>(1.17)</td><td>(0.86)</td><td>0.67) (1.00)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Stock Volatility (t-1)</td><td>-1.04**</td><td>-1.31**</td><td>-0.80*</td><td>-1.10*</td><td>-0.66</td><td>0.27 -0.51</td></tr><tr><td>(0.26)</td><td>(0.36)</td><td>(0.36)</td><td>(0.46)</td><td>(0.32)</td><td>(0.27) (0.39)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Market Cap</td><td>0.89**</td><td>8.86** (0.28)</td><td>7.13**</td><td>13.83** (0.38)</td><td>-3.04** (0.31)</td><td>-7.96** -10.68**</td></tr><tr><td>(0.28) -33.86**</td><td>19.25**</td><td>(0.37) 19.34*</td><td>6555*</td><td>-36.02**</td><td>(0.26) (0.38) -86.66**</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">1 / Price</td><td>(5.04)</td><td>(5.92)</td><td>(7.16)</td><td>(6.52)</td><td>(7.24)</td><td>-53.10** (3.35) (6.12)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

Table 10: Message Frequency by Exchange. The table reports the average stock-day distribution of messages by HFT and non-HFT on all three exchanges for the 15 non-cross-listed stocks in the TSX 60. The sample period is from 10/15/2012 to 06/28/2013. The table is similar to Table 3 except that each message type further broken down by exchange 1, 2 or 3.   

<table><tr><td>Exchange 1</td><td>HFT</td><td>non-HFT</td></tr><tr><td>Trade - Change price</td><td>0.23%</td><td>0.29%</td></tr><tr><td>Trade - Same Price</td><td>0.56%</td><td>2.48%</td></tr><tr><td>Improving Order</td><td>1.16%</td><td>1.13%</td></tr><tr><td>Worsening Cancel</td><td>0.62%</td><td>0.97%</td></tr><tr><td>Order Placement at NBBO</td><td>14.93%</td><td>8.46%</td></tr><tr><td>Order Cancel at NBBO</td><td>11.65%</td><td>5.29%</td></tr><tr><td>Order 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>3.99%</td><td>1.39%</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>4.40%</td><td>2.30%</td></tr><tr><td>Order &gt; 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>4.77%</td><td>12.80%</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel &gt; 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>6.00%</td><td>16.57%</td></tr><tr><td>Total # of Observations</td><td>16,250</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Exchange 2</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trade - Change price</td><td>0.28%</td><td>0.35%</td></tr><tr><td>Trade - Same Price</td><td>1.11%</td><td>4.67%</td></tr><tr><td>Improving Order</td><td>2.12%</td><td>1.70%</td></tr><tr><td>Worsening Cancel</td><td>0.73%</td><td>0.72%</td></tr><tr><td>Order Placement at NBBO</td><td>12.79%</td><td>11.13%</td></tr><tr><td>Order Cancel at NBBO</td><td>10.39%</td><td>6.98%</td></tr><tr><td>Order 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>2.12%</td><td>2.02%</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>3.16%</td><td>3.36%</td></tr><tr><td>Order &gt; 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>3.89%</td><td>11.77%</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel &gt; 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>4.87%</td><td>15.85%</td></tr><tr><td>Total # of Observations</td><td>33,669</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Exchange 3</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trade - Change price</td><td>0.09%</td><td>0.17%</td></tr><tr><td>Trade - Same Price</td><td>0.37%</td><td>2.18%</td></tr><tr><td>Improving Order</td><td>2.90%</td><td>0.79%</td></tr><tr><td>Worsening Cancel</td><td>1.34%</td><td>0.25%</td></tr><tr><td>Order Placement at NBBO</td><td>17.95%</td><td>4.43%</td></tr><tr><td>Order Cancel at NBBO</td><td>16.00%</td><td>3.27%</td></tr><tr><td>Order 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>6.32%</td><td>0.95%</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>6.92%</td><td>1.56%</td></tr><tr><td>Order &gt; 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>11.12%</td><td>4.96%</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel &gt; 1 tick from NBBO</td><td>11.96%</td><td>6.46%</td></tr><tr><td>Total # of Observations</td><td>22,547</td><td></td></tr></table>

Table 11: Information Shares. The table reports the average stock-day Hasbrouck (1995) minimum and maximum information shares for the 15 non-cross-listed stocks in the TSX 60. The sample period is from $\mathbf { 1 0 / 1 5 / 2 0 1 2 }$ to 06/28/2013. Panel A evaluates HFT and non-HFT quotes. Panel B evaluates quotes on each exchange. Panel C evaluated HFT and non-HFT quotes on each exchange. \* and \*\* next to the HFT-Min point estimate represents a statistically significant difference at the $5 \%$ and $1 \%$ , respectively, between the HFT Min and the non-HFT Max estimates, using standard errors clustered by stock and by day.

Panel A: By HFT   

<table><tr><td></td><td>Min</td><td>Max</td></tr><tr><td>HFT</td><td>0.59**</td><td>0.81</td></tr><tr><td>non-HFT</td><td>0.19</td><td>0.41</td></tr></table>

Table B: By Exchange   

<table><tr><td></td><td>Min</td><td>Max</td></tr><tr><td>Exchange 1</td><td>0.29</td><td>0.58</td></tr><tr><td>Exchange 2</td><td>0.23</td><td>0.47</td></tr><tr><td>Exchange 3</td><td>0.14</td><td>0.36</td></tr></table>

Panel C: By HFT and Exchange   

<table><tr><td rowspan="4">Exchange 1 HFT non-HFT Exchange 2</td><td>Min</td><td>Max</td></tr><tr><td>0.75**</td><td>0.87</td></tr><tr><td>0.13</td><td>0.25</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>HFT</td><td>0.56**</td><td>0.76</td></tr><tr><td>non-HFT</td><td>0.24</td><td>0.44</td></tr><tr><td>Exchange 3</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>HFT</td><td>0.84**</td><td>0.93</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>non-HFT</td><td>0.07</td><td>0.16</td></tr></table>

Table 12: Message Impulse Response Function by Exchange. The table reports stock-day average message Impulse Response Functions (IRF) from a vector-autoregression (VAR) similar to the one in Table 4, except that each message is broken down by exchange 1, 2 or 3 for the 15 non-crosslisted stocks in the TSX 60. The sample period is from 10/15/2012 to 06/28/2013. The rows represent the variable being shocked by one unit. The columns represent the variable being affected. Panel A reports the average IRFs for the same exchange (e.g. the IRF of an Order HFT innovation on Exchange 3 on Cancel HFT on Exchange 3). Panel B reports the average IRFs for the other exchanges (e.g. the IRF of an Order HFT innovation on Exchange 3 on Cancel HFT on Exchanges 1 and 2). \*, \*\* next to the coefficient represents that the coefficient differs from zero and is statistical significance at the 5 and $1 \%$ level, respectively using standard errors clustered by stock and by day.

Panel A: Same Exchange   

<table><tr><td></td><td>Trade NBBO HFT</td><td>Trade BO FT</td><td>Order BBO HFT</td><td>Cancel NBO HFT</td><td>Order BBO HFT</td><td>Cancel BO FT</td><td>Trade NBO non-HFT</td><td>Trade BO non-HFT</td><td>Order NBO nn-HFT</td><td>Cancel NBO no-HFT</td><td>Order NBBO non-HFT</td><td>Cancel NBO non-HFT</td></tr><tr><td>Variable Trade ΔNBBO HFT</td><td>0.00*</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.28**</td><td>-0.00*</td><td>0.44**</td><td>-0.06**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.03**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.00</td><td>0.04**</td><td>0.02**</td></tr><tr><td>Trade NBBO HFT</td><td>0.09**</td><td>0.54**</td><td>0.19**</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>0.30**</td><td>-0.11**</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>-0.03**</td><td>0.09**</td><td>0.00</td><td>0.03**</td><td>-0.00**</td></tr><tr><td>Order ΔNBBO HFT</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.22**</td><td>-0.10**</td><td>0.19**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.03**</td><td>0.00*</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.03**</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel ΔNBBO HFT</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.03**</td><td>0.02**</td><td></td><td></td><td>-0.00**</td><td></td><td>-0.02**</td><td></td><td>-0.01**</td><td>0.02**</td></tr><tr><td>Order NBBO HFT</td><td>0.00**</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>-0.15**</td><td>0.04**</td><td></td><td>-0.03** -0.01**</td><td></td><td>0.00</td><td>0.03**</td><td>0.01**</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel NBBO HFT</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.01** 0.00**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>0.23**</td><td>-0.27**</td><td>-0.00 -0.00**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.00 -0.00**</td><td>0.01** 0.00**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.01**</td></tr><tr><td>Trade ΔNBBO non-HFT</td><td>-0.00</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.05** 0.16**</td><td>0.02** 0.00</td><td>-0.11** 0.40**</td><td>0.14**</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>0.05**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Trade NBBO non-HFT</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.05**</td><td>0.10**</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>0.30**</td><td>0.04** 0.01**</td><td>0.03**</td><td>0.49**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.03**</td><td>-0.00**</td></tr><tr><td>Order ΔNBBO non-HFT</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.23**</td><td>-0.10**</td><td></td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.03**</td><td>0.00*</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.03**</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel ΔNBBO non-HFT</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.03**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.19** -0.15**</td><td>0.04**</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>-0.03**</td><td>-0.02**</td><td>0.00</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>0.02**</td></tr><tr><td>Order NBBO non-HFT</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.09**</td><td>0.00</td><td>0.00**</td><td>-0.00</td><td>0.01**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>0.12**</td><td>-0.30**</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel NBBO non-HFT</td><td>0.00**</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>0.00*</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.05**</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>-0.03**</td><td>-0.03**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>-0.19**</td><td>0.10**</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

# Table 12 Continued

Panel B: Other Exchange

<table><tr><td></td><td>Trade ΔNBBO HFT</td><td>Trade NBO HFT</td><td>Order ΔNBBO HFT</td><td>Cancel NBO HFT</td><td>Order NBBO HFT</td><td>Cancel NBBO HFT</td><td>Trade ΔNBBO non-HFT</td><td>Trade NBBO non-HFT</td><td>Order ΔNBBO non-HFT</td><td>Cancel NBO non-HFT</td><td>Order NBBO non-HFT</td><td>Cancel BO non-HFT</td></tr><tr><td>Variable Trade ΔNBBO HFT</td><td>0.00**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>0.05**</td><td>0.00*</td><td>0.17**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>-0.00</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.02**</td></tr><tr><td>Trade NBBO HFT</td><td>0.05**</td><td>0.14**</td><td>0.07**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.17**</td><td>-0.01*</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.06**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.03**</td><td>0.00**</td></tr><tr><td>Order ΔNBBO HFT</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.14**</td><td>0.03**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.03**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>-0.00</td><td>0.04**</td><td>0.02**</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel ΔNBBO HFT</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.05**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>-0.05**</td><td>0.05**</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>-0.02**</td><td>-0.02**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>-0.04**</td><td>0.03**</td></tr><tr><td>Order NBBO HFT</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.03**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.15**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.07**</td><td>-0.02**</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel NBBO HFT</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>-0.02**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>-0.00</td><td>0.13**</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>0.03**</td></tr><tr><td>Trade ΔNBBO non-HFT</td><td>0.00**</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>0.05**</td><td>0.00</td><td>0.17**</td><td>0.04**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.00</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.03**</td></tr><tr><td>Trade NBBO non-HFT</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.03**</td><td>0.04**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.16**</td><td>0.06**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.16**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.04**</td><td>0.02**</td></tr><tr><td>Order ΔNBBO non-HFT</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.14**</td><td>0.03**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.03**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>-0.00</td><td>0.04**</td><td>0.02**</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel ΔNBBO non-HFT</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.05**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>-0.05**</td><td>0.05**</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>-0.02**</td><td>-0.02**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>-0.04**</td><td>0.03**</td></tr><tr><td>Order NBBO non-HFT</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.06**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>0.14**</td><td>-0.03**</td></tr><tr><td>Cancel NBBO non-HFT</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>0.00**</td><td>0.02**</td><td>0.03**</td><td>-0.00**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>-0.01**</td><td>0.01**</td><td>-0.06**</td><td>0.08**</td></tr></table>

Table 13: Cross Exchange Price Change Sequences. The table reports the frequencies of price-change sequences on Exchange 2 and Exchange 3 for the 15 non-cross-listed stocks in the TSX 60. The sample period is from 10/15/2012 to 06/28/2013. The sequences capture all events in which Exchange 2 and Exchange 3 start with the same bid or ask price, and are followed by one of the exchanges best bid or ask price changing, and subsequently the other exchange updating its quote in the same direction. The deviation and resolution must persist at least one millisecond. The statistics are calculated using data from 10/15/2012 – 06/28/2013. It evaluates the joint probability of a HFT/non-HFT and Trade/Order/Cancel opening a sequence and an HFT/non-HFT and Trade/Order/ Cancel subsequently updating the second exchange’s quotes. The average stock-day has 1021 sequences that persist for at least 1 millisecond.

Panel A: Conditional on Open/Close Order Type and HFT, > 1 Millisecond   

<table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td colspan="3">Second HFT</td><td colspan="3">non- HFT</td><td rowspan="2">% Open by</td><td rowspan="2">% Open</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>First HFT Trade</td><td>Trade 0.7%</td><td>Order</td><td>Cancel 0.9%</td><td>Trade 0.4%</td><td>Order</td><td>Cancel 0.2%</td><td>Trader- Order 2.2%</td><td>by Trader</td></tr><tr><td>Order Cancel non-HFT</td><td>--- 2.0%</td><td>27.1%</td><td>--- 17.7%</td><td>--- 3.8%</td><td>9.1%</td><td>--- 7.0%</td><td>36.1% 30.6%</td><td>68.9%</td></tr><tr><td>Trade Order Cancel</td><td>0.9% --- 0.5%</td><td>6.9%</td><td>3.0% --- 4.6%</td><td>2.6% --- 1.5%</td><td>5.0%</td><td>2.0% --- 4.1%</td><td>8.6% 11.9% 10.6%</td><td>31.1%</td></tr><tr><td>% Close by Trader-</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Order</td><td>4.2%</td><td>34.0%</td><td>26.2%</td><td>8.3%</td><td>14.1%</td><td>13.3%</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>% Close by</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trader</td><td></td><td>64.3%</td><td></td><td></td><td>35.7%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>