# Intraday Technical Analysis of Individual Stocks on the Tokyo Stock Exchange

Ryuichi Yamamoto Department of International Business, National Chengchi University, 64 Sec. 2, Chih-Nan Rd. Taipei, 116, Taiwan Email address: ryuichi@nccu.edu.tw

May 2012

# Abstract

This paper conducts an intraday technical analysis of individual stocks listed on the Nikkei 225. In addition to the price-based technical rules popularly examined in the literature, we propose and statistically investigate technical rules that utilize information regarding 1) the order-flow imbalance and 2) the order-book imbalance. Such rules have not been developed and investigated by previous studies on technical analysis. Technical analysis using the imbalance-based trading rules is motivated by the evidence presented first in this paper that short-term returns can be predicted from the information regarding the order-flow and orderbook imbalances for more than half of Nikkei 225-listed stocks. However, we demonstrate that no strategies, including limit order trading where trading signals are derived from the order-book imbalance, beat the buy-and-hold strategy within our sample. The results imply that past prices and demand/supply imbalances do not contribute to profiting in intraday trading and that non-execution and picking-off risks are too large for limit order trading to be profitable in our sample. Our results are robust with a different sample period with a higher return volatility, in which extra risk may be added to dynamic strategies, implying a higher risk premium and therefore greater predictability.

JEL classification: G12; G17; G14

Keywords: Technical analysis; Order-flow imbalance; order-book imbalance; Intraday trading; Data snooping; Japanese stock market

# 1. Introduction

Technical analysis involves the use of historical market data, such as price, volume, and other observables, to predict future returns in financial assets. This technique has been widely used by financial market professionals and much investigated by academic researchers. For example, the studies of survey data conducted by Lui and Mole (1998), Menkhoff and Taylor (2007), and Menkhoff (2010) demonstrate that financial market professionals rely heavily upon technical trading strategies to form their own trading plans.1 Numerous empirical studies of technical analysis have also been carried out, particularly since the 1960s.2 Thus far, real market professionals and academic researchers have paid particular attention to past price data in order to evaluate the profitability of technical trading rules. However, in addition to price and volume data, other market data such as order flows and order-book information, have recently been made available to the public in real time.3 Since order flows and the state of the order book provide information about likely price movements, technical trading strategies that are formulated based upon such information would be expected to yield profits. This paper thus aims to investigate the profitability of the trading strategies based upon the order flows and order-book information as well as past prices by utilizing data from the limit order book and transactions in individual stocks on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.

In addition to linking past prices to technical trading strategies, as has been typically carried out by previous studies, the present paper makes a unique contribution to the body of knowledge on this topic by relating 1) the order-flow imbalance and 2) the order-book imbalance to the profitability of intraday technical trading rules. As indicated by Handa and Schwartz (1996, p. 1835), investigating the profitability of trading strategies based upon order-book information provides the rationale not only for limit order trading, which is important to stock traders, but also for the viability of an order-driven market. In addition, technical traders in reality would have more trading options if we were able to provide profitable technical rules based on order-flow information.

This paper is also motivated by the several previous research studies that have demonstrated that order-flow and order-book imbalances have a predictive ability with respect to short-horizon returns. For example, selected papers, such as those of Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2005), Su, Huang, and Hsu (2010), and Visaltanachoti and Yang (2010), empirically demonstrate that short-horizon returns are predictable from the order-flow imbalance, which is typically defined as the number of seller-initiated trades subtracted from the number of buyers (or the dollars received by sellers subtracted from the dollars paid by buyers). When the order-flow imbalance is positive, meaning that the pressure to buy dominates the market, the price tends to go up, and vice versa.4 Furthermore, Chordia and Subrahmanyam (2004) and Su, Huang, and Hsu (2010) find that trading profits are generated from the order-flow imbalance. These empirical works confirm the significant relation among the order-flow imbalance, the return predictability, and the trading profitability in the short horizon, and imply that intraday technical trading rules, when combined with the order-flow imbalance, can be profitable.

Second, previous studies demonstrate significant relations among the current order imbalance, namely the difference between the current market depths of the buy side and the sell side, investors’ trading decisions, and stock price dynamics. For example, Handa, Schwartz, and Tiwari (2003) indicate that stock investors tend to place more aggressive orders, such as market orders, as the order-book imbalance, that is, the difference between current depths in buy and sell sides, expands, and less aggressive orders, such as limit orders outside the spread, as it grows thinner.5

The results of Handa, Schwartz, and Tiwari (2003) resemble the findings of several empirical studies such as Biais, Hillion, and Spatt (1995), Griffiths, Smith, Turnbull, and White (2000), Hall and Hautsch (2006), and Ranaldo (2004) that explain as follows. Real stock investors face a trade-off between an advantageous price and the risk of non-execution. When investors submit a market order rather than a limit order, they can certainly execute the order, but they give up obtaining a superior execution price. Meanwhile, investors who place a limit order obtain a favorable execution price, but at a higher risk of non-execution and of failing to earn any profits. Such a risk of non-execution increases as the depth on the same side of the order becomes thicker compared with that on the other side. When an agent recognizes a thicker order book, the agent places more aggressive orders. When the book is thin, investors tend to assume that more aggressive orders are coming from the opposite side, and thus a limit order is more likely to be executed, yielding more favorable prices for investors at a reduced risk of non-execution as a result of placing less aggressive orders. This trading strategy indicates that when the bid side becomes thicker than the ask side, for example, market buy orders are more likely to be observed, pushing up future prices and making return predictable from the order-book imbalance. 6 In addition, Osler (2003)

demonstrates that the limit order book is a key source for predicting short-term future returns,7 while Harris and Panchapagesan (2005) show that traders who trade ahead of the heavy side of the book are capable of making a positive profit. Thus, previous studies imply certain profitable opportunities from intraday technical rules in which we derive trading signals from the imbalance of the limit order book.

This paper evaluates the intraday trading performances of our technical rules in individual stocks on the Tokyo Stock Exchange. This evaluation is conducted using an order book and transaction data on individual stocks listed on the Nikkei 225 from September 1, 2006 to August 31, 2007, distributed by Nikkei Media Marketing, Inc., an information vendor in the Nikkei Group. We apply both the Reality Check bootstrap procedure proposed by White (2000) and the Superior Predictive Ability (SPA) test created by Hansen (2005) in order to evaluate the profitability of our trading strategies as well as to reduce the datasnooping problem, which may occur if profitable rules are found by pure chance.8

We first provide evidence that order-flow and order-book imbalances can, in fact, predict short-horizon returns on the Japanese stock market during our sample period. This procedure will be carried out before the technical analysis, as little empirical evidence exists in the literature regarding the predictability of the short-horizon returns of individual stocks on the Japanese stock market. However, in contrast to the presented evidence, we demonstrate that none of the technical trading strategies formulated based on past prices, the order-flow imbalance, and information on the demand/supply imbalance in the limit order book generate higher profits compared with a buy-and-hold strategy once the effect of data snooping has been accounted for. At the end of the paper, we confirm the robustness of our results with a sample of different periods that have a higher TOPIX return volatility, in which extra risk may be added to dynamic strategies, implying a higher risk premium and therefore greater predictability.

We emphasize the following two points regarding our results. First, as implied from the results of the predictability of the short-horizon returns, the best technical rules based on order-flow and order-book imbalances as well as past price information actually generate positive trading profits in our sample. However, the profits are too small and not sufficiently larger than those derived from a buy-and-hold strategy. Second, the unprofitable technical strategies include limit order trading, in which trading signals are derived from the orderbook imbalance.9 Thus, the results of this paper also suggest that non-execution risk and picking-off risk are too large for limit order trading to be profitable during our sample periods.10

Although our most significant contribution is that we propose and statistically investigate unexamined technical rules that are formulated based on order-flow and orderbook imbalances, while also taking into account the effect of data snooping, this paper contains four other contributions. First, we demonstrate the predictability of the short-horizon returns of individual stocks from order-flow and order-book imbalances on the Japanese stock market during our sample period.

Second, rather than using stock indices as is typical in the literature, individual stocks are utilized in our analyses. Such an approach has the following two advantages. First in reality, certain traders, such as certain day traders, still utilize technical strategies on individual equities. Thus, we provide a way for certain types of investors, who trade individual securities, to make profits. Second, our investigation into individual stocks also provides an approach to better manage the portfolios of investors trading a set of individual stocks, such as those managing ETFs (Exchange Traded Funds), whose trading volumes have recently been expanding rapidly.

In terms of our third contribution, we investigate the performance of technical trading rules in terms of firm size. The size-stratified analyses provide insights into whether the differences in the results may be attributed to information asymmetry in the market, institutional herding, or order splitting. For example, Chordia, Roll, Subrahmanyam (2005, 2008) demonstrate a stronger predictability for short-horizon returns, such as those 5 minutes in length, for smaller firms in their sample than for larger firms.11 Generally, larger firms possess a superior information environment, resulting in less information asymmetry in the market. If this situation is indeed the case, the returns of smaller firms are more predictable. However, as Chordia and Subrahmanyam (2004) find, the imbalance has a stronger autocorrelation for large firms than it does for small firms, suggesting a greater influence of order splitting in large firms. 12 Chordia, Roll, Subrahmanyam (2005) suggest that this imbalance also occurs because of the greater influence of institutional herding. Further, in the research of Chordia and Subrahmanyam (2004), the persistence of the imbalance generates a stronger return predictability, which implies that if there is a certain form of herding or order splitting in large firms, even in intraday trading, the return predictability is stronger for large firms.

Certain previous papers conduct size- or industry-stratified technical analyses. For example, Shynkevich (2012) relates the profitability of the technical rules to the different sizes of the industries or sector portfolios in the US stock market. Meanwhile, Marshall, Qian, and Young (2008) categorize stocks in their daily NYSE and Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) series in terms of size, liquidity, and industry characteristics. They determine the profitability of smaller, less liquid stocks, although they generally fail to find profitable rules for the period from 1990 to 2004. Rather than examining the daily time-series of industry or sector portfolios, our paper relates order-flow and order-book imbalances to the technical rules and investigates the intraday performances of individual stocks on the Japanese stock market.

Fourth, this paper reports on intraday technical analysis, which has garnered recent attention from academic researchers for two reasons. First, a daily trading horizon is the frequency that has generally been examined in previous technical analyses; however, most studies find that technical trading rules are not profitable when transaction costs are included.13,14 The results suggest that trading only once per day may be too slow to capture profit opportunities. Second, as shown in several studies that have surveyed market participants, such as those of Lui and Mole (1998), Menkhoff and Taylor (2007), and Menkhoff (2010), the shorter the trading horizon, such as the intraday, the greater importance that financial market participants place upon technical trading and the less upon fundamental analysis. Nonetheless, relatively few papers analyze trading profits from technical indicators using ultra high-frequency data in stock markets.15 Marshall, Cahan, and Cahan (2008) use 5- minute intervals for a composite price dataset of S&P’s Depository Receipts. They demonstrate that none of their 7,846 rules is able to beat the market once the data-snooping problem has been taken into account. Our paper differs from that of Marshall, Cahan, and Cahan (2008), as we examine a dataset of individual stocks on the Japanese stock market as well as order imbalance technical rules.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces our dataset and summary statistics for returns of our individual stocks. The relation between returns and order-flow and order-book imbalances are also statistically examined. Section 3 introduces the technical trading rules used in this paper, while Section 4 describes the procedures for White’s Reality Check bootstrap and Hansen’s SPA. Section 5 outlines the empirical tests. Section 6 concludes.

# 2. Data and Preliminary Data Analyses

# 2.1. Data

We utilize the dataset provided by Nikkei Media Marketing, Inc. This contains the following information: 1) transaction prices with time stamps; 2) whether trades occur at the best bid or ask (from which the direction of trades can be determined); $^ { 1 6 } 3$ ) whether the prices are determined in the opening or closing sessions; and 4) order-book information, such as five limit orders from the best quotes with the depth available at these limit prices. Our sample covers a one-year period, specifically from September 1, 2006 to August 31, 2007, for all Nikkei 225 individual stocks listed on August 31, 2007. There are 247 trading days over the entire period (82 and 165 trading days in 2006 and 2007, respectively). We select the individual stocks that were listed on the Nikkei 225 on August 31, 2007, the last day of our sample, but exclude any stocks that were ever delisted from Nikkei 225 stocks during our sample periods. In addition, we exclude any stock whose trades were ever suspended for particular days during our sample periods.17 As a result, 207 stocks remain in our sample. The mean daily trading volume amounts to 5.9 million shares, and the mean daily number of trades is 908.4.

This paper sorts the firms in our sample into quartiles according to market capitalization at the end of our sample period in order to present size-stratified results. The lowest quartile (the group with the smallest size) in our sample contains 51 firms, whose market capitalizations range from ¥17.4 billion (Clarion Co., Ltd.) to ¥203.7 billion (Denki Kagaku Kogyo K.K.). The second quartile includes the next-smallest group comprising 52 stocks, according to market capitalization, ranging from ¥206.1 billion (Fuji Electric Holdings Co., Ltd.) to ¥444.0 billion (Shionogi & Co., Ltd.). The third quartile group consists of the next 52 stocks in size, ranging from ¥453.0 billion (Mitsubishi Motors Corp.) to ¥1181.9 billion (Resona Holdings, Inc.). The members of the largest market capitalization group (the last 52 firms) range from ¥1,205.3 billion (Asahi Glass Co., Ltd.) to ¥14,642.1 billion (Toyota Motor Corp.).

# 2.2. Summary statistics on returns

Prior to investigating the profitability of technical trading strategies in the next section, this subsection examines the statistical properties of returns and determines the statistical tests appropriate for examining the performance of technical trading strategies. We present the properties of the returns from mid-quote prices as well as the transaction prices. Returns from transaction prices incorporate the bid-ask spread, which is a part of transaction costs, while those from mid-quotes are free of it.18 We demonstrate that neither of the returns is normally distributed for our individual stocks, suggesting that, rather than using the standard $t$ -test, bootstrapping methods should be applied in order to investigate the returns from technical trading rules.

Our 5-minute returns are calculated using the mid-quote and transaction prices nearest the end of the 5-minute interval during the official trading hours of the Tokyo Stock Exchange; however, transaction prices determined in the opening and closing sessions are excluded.19 We define returns over the 5-minute interval as follows:

$$
r _ { t + 1 } = \ln P _ { t + 1 } - \ln P _ { t }
$$

where $P _ { t }$ refers to the mid-quote or transaction price.

Tables 1 and 2 present the summary statistics associated with the 5-minute returns of the mid-quote and transaction prices, respectively, for the size-based groups. The means and standard deviations are multiplied by ${ 1 0 } ^ { 4 }$ and $1 0 ^ { 2 }$ , respectively, in order to adjust the units for presentation. In Table 1, the number of returns from mid-quote prices is the same for all firms; thus, the standard deviation is zero. The number of returns from transaction prices is slightly different for some firms, since opening prices for those firms are sometimes determined after 9 a.m.; thus, the standard deviations in Table 2 are not zero. The mean midquote returns are positive for 97 out of 207 stocks (Table 1), while they are positive for 91 out of 205 firms in transaction price returns (Table 2). The mean returns from both the midquote and transaction prices are larger for larger-sized groups (on average, $0 . 0 3 7 / 1 0 ^ { 4 }$ for the largest firm group and $- 0 . 0 3 2 / 1 0 ^ { 4 }$ for the smallest size group). The standard deviations of returns are similar across all firms (approximately $0 . 2 1 / 1 0 ^ { 2 }$ ), and the distribution of returns for all of the stocks has fatter tails than that of the standard normal distribution. The return distributions are skewed to the right, on average, for the smallest group and to the left for the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th quartiles. Skewness is negative for 122 firms for mid-quote returns and 125 firms for transaction price returns out of 207 firms, but more firms tend to display a negative skewness as size increases. As for mid-quote returns, 38 firms out of 52 in the largest firm group yield a negative skewness, and 40 firms for transaction price returns.

In addition, we conducted two statistical tests on returns, namely the Jarque–Bera test, whose null hypothesis states that returns follow a normal distribution, and the Ljung–Box test, whose null hypothesis states that returns are not autocorrelated. The null hypothesis for the Jarque–Bera test is rejected for all 207 firms for mid-quote and transaction price returns. The null hypothesis for the Ljung–Box test is rejected at the $5 \%$ level of significance for 204 firms for mid-quote returns and 206 firms for transaction price returns. Thus, our results suggest that returns are not normally distributed and are generally autocorrelated. 20 Consequently, the standard $t$ -test should not be applied to test the returns of technical trading rules. The profitability of technical trading rules should be evaluated by means of the bootstrap methodologies described in Section 4.

Table 1: Summary statistics of 5-minute returns by size-stratified groups. The 5-minute returns are calculated using mid-quote prices. The numbers are cross-sectional averages of each statistic within a size group. The numbers in parentheses are the cross-sectional standard deviations of each statistic in a size group. The means and standard deviations are multiplied by $1 0 ^ { 4 }$ and $1 0 ^ { 2 }$ , respectively, in order to adjust the units for presentation. In addition, $p$ -values from the Jarque–Bera and Ljung–Box tests are given, demonstrating that returns are not normally distributed and are autocorrelated.   

<table><tr><td></td><td>1st quartile (smallest group)</td><td>2nd quartile</td><td>3rd quartile</td><td>4th quartile (largest group)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Number of returns</td><td>23217</td><td>23217</td><td>23217</td><td>23217</td></tr><tr><td>(0)</td><td>(0)</td><td>(0)</td><td>(0)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Mean</td><td>-0.032</td><td>-0.009</td><td>0.015</td><td>0.037</td></tr><tr><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Std.</td><td>0.213</td><td>0.206</td><td>0.200</td><td>0.195</td></tr><tr><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Skewness</td><td>0.818</td><td>-2.194</td><td>-2.200</td><td>-1.279</td></tr><tr><td>(3.713)</td><td>(6.736)</td><td>(15.936)</td><td>(1.748)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Kurtosis</td><td>210.1</td><td>313.2</td><td>505.3</td><td>177.4</td></tr><tr><td>(166.6)</td><td>(488.4)</td><td>(2125.1)</td><td>(86.7)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Jarque-Bera</td><td>&lt;0.01</td><td>&lt;0.01</td><td>&lt;0.01</td><td>&lt;0.01</td></tr><tr><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Ljung-Box</td><td>0.02</td><td>0.03</td><td>0.03</td><td>&lt;0.01</td></tr><tr><td>(0.094)</td><td>(0.12)</td><td>(0.12)</td><td>(0.02)</td></tr></table>

Table 2: Summary statistics of 5-minute returns by size-stratified groups. The 5-minute returns are calculated using transaction prices. The numbers are cross-sectional averages of each statistic within a size group. The numbers in parentheses are the cross-sectional standard deviations of each statistic in a size group. The means and standard deviations are multiplied by ${ 1 0 } ^ { \dot { 4 } }$ and $1 0 ^ { 2 }$ , respectively, in order to adjust the units for presentation. In addition, $p$ -values from the Jarque–Bera and Ljung–Box tests are given, demonstrating that returns are not normally distributed and are autocorrelated.   

<table><tr><td></td><td>1st quartile (smallest group)</td><td>2nd quartile</td><td>3rd quartile</td><td>4th quartile (largest group)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Number of returns</td><td>23217.0</td><td>23216.9</td><td>23217.0</td><td>23217.0</td></tr><tr><td>(0.14)</td><td>(0.97)</td><td>(0)</td><td>(0)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Mean</td><td>-0.032</td><td>-0.009</td><td>0.015</td><td>0.037</td></tr><tr><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Std.</td><td>0.235</td><td>0.221</td><td>0.215</td><td>0.227</td></tr><tr><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Skewness</td><td>1.974</td><td>-1.722</td><td>-2.513</td><td>-1.041</td></tr><tr><td>(7.650)</td><td>(5.128)</td><td>(15.469)</td><td>(1.385)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Kurtosis</td><td>281.4</td><td>239.1</td><td>474.2</td><td>130.5</td></tr><tr><td>(720.0)</td><td>(327.7)</td><td>(2027.9)</td><td>(81.4)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Jarque-Bera</td><td>&lt;0.01</td><td>&lt;0.01</td><td>&lt;0.01</td><td>&lt;0.01</td></tr><tr><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Ljung-Box</td><td>&lt;0.01</td><td>&lt;0.01</td><td>&lt;0.01</td><td>&lt;0.01</td></tr><tr><td>(0.06)</td><td>(0.01)</td><td>(0.04)</td><td>(&lt;0.01)</td></tr></table>

# 2.3. Predictability of returns from past order-flow and order-book imbalances

This subsection investigates the 5-minute return predictability from order-flow and order-book imbalances, as relatively little empirical research has been carried out on the predictability of returns on the Japanese stock market compared with that conducted on NYSE-listed stocks. We demonstrate that returns are predictable from order-flow and orderbook imbalances for more than half of the Nikkei 225-listed stocks.

We utilize the two definitions of the order-flow imbalance presented by Chordia, Roll, Subrahmanyam (2005). The first is the number of seller-initiated trades subtracted from the number of buyer-initiated trades, denoted as OFIB#, and the second is the Yen amounts received by sellers subtracted from the Yen amounts paid by buyers (OFIB¥). The order-flow imbalance is computed for each stock over each 5-minute interval. Following the theoretical and empirical work of Handa, Schwartz, and Tiwari (2003), the order-book imbalance is defined as the difference between the current depths of the buy side and those of the sell side (OBIB). The order-book imbalance is computed at the end of each 5-minute interval. As in previous empirical research on the predictability of returns from the order-flow imbalance, such as that by Chordia, Roll, Subrahmanyam (2005), Visaltanachoti and Yang (2010), and Su, Huang, and Hsu (2010), returns at time $t$ are calculated from the bid-ask midpoints closest to the end of the time intervals, denoted as $r _ { t }$ . The returns from quote midpoints avoid serial correlations by the bid-ask bounce. All our variables are recorded from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. and from $1 2 { : } 3 0 \ \mathrm { p . m }$ . to $3 { : } 0 0 \ \mathrm { \ p . m }$ ., the official trading hours for the Tokyo Stock Exchange.

Throughout this paper, we focus on 5-minute intervals for two reasons. First, previous studies demonstrate the predictability of returns in NYSE-listed stocks up to 10 minutes. This subsection investigates stocks listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, which is one of the largest stock exchanges in the world. Thus, selecting a time interval similar to that investigated in previous studies should be appropriate for examining the return predictability of our stocks. Secondly, while it is technically possible to select shorter intervals, as emphasized in Chordia, Roll, Subrahmanyam (2008), non-trading would be a problem.

We thus follow the method proposed by Chordia, Roll, Subrahmanyam (2005) in order to measure the predictability of returns from past order-flow and order-book imbalances. Accordingly, we regress returns on lagged returns and lagged order-flow or order-book imbalances over 5-minute intervals as follows:

$$
r _ { t } = \beta _ { 1 } r _ { t - 1 } + \beta _ { 2 } X _ { t - 1 } + \varepsilon _ { t }
$$

where $X _ { t - 1 } = O F I B \# _ { t - 1 } , O F I B \# _ { t - 1 }$ , or $O B I B _ { t - 1 }$ . The regression is then run independently for each stock.

Table 3 summarizes the results. Three results in particular should be emphasized here. First, our imbalance variables (order-flow and order-book imbalances) are all significant for more than half of sample firms. Further, returns can be predicted from order-flow and orderbook imbalances, implying that investors do not conduct countervailing trades and remove the serial dependence in returns within 5 minutes. The significance of this tendency increases for larger-sized groups. For example, significant firms comprise $5 5 \%$ to $65 \%$ of the smallestsized group, but they increase to approximately $70 \%$ of the largest-sized group.

Among about 3000 firms in the Japanese stock market, most of the stocks in our sample are large firms. Thus, our size-stratified analysis is conducted only for bigger or smaller stocks among the major stocks in the Japanese stock markets. However, even among our sample firms, there is a size difference that may generate the differences in our results. The returns may be more predictable for smaller firms if asymmetric information matters in the market. Meanwhile, as described by Chordia and Subrahmanyam (2004), the returns are less predictable for smaller firms if the persistence of order imbalances is generated by institutional herding or order splitting. This implies that if the fraction of predictable stocks is larger in smaller firms than in larger firms, we conclude that the effect from information asymmetry may be stronger than the effect from institutional herding or order splitting. If the fraction of predictable stocks is larger in larger firms than in smaller firms, the effect from institutional herding or order splitting may be larger in the market than the effect from information asymmetry. Our results suggest that since the proportion of predictable stocks is higher in larger firms than in smaller firms, the influences from institutional herding or order splitting are stronger in the market than those from information asymmetry.

Second, the coefficients of the imbalance variables are usually positive, indicating that the price tends to increase when the buying pressure from order flows or in the order book dominates the market, and vice versa.21 Third, future returns can also be predicted from past returns, indicating that past price information can be utilized to predict future prices.22 In particular, the fractions of firms generating predictability from past returns are higher for larger firms than for smaller firms, although the difference is relatively small ( $82 \%$ for the smallest firms and $9 2 - 9 6 \%$ for the largest firms). All the results mentioned above lead us to conclude that we may be able to find profitable technical trading strategies that are based upon past imbalances of order flows and the order book as well as upon past price information.

Table 3: Regression of return predictability from order-flow and order-book imbalances by size group.

We examine the predictability of returns utilizing the predictability model of Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2005). Returns are calculated from the midpoints of the bid-ask spread. OFIB# refers to the number of seller-initiated trades subtracted from the number of buyer-initiated trades, while OFIB¥ marks the Yen amounts received by sellers subtracted from the Yen amounts paid by buyers. The order-book imbalance (OBIB) is defined as the difference between the market depths of the buy side and those of the sell side at the end of each 5-minute interval. The coefficients for OFIB#, OFIB¥, and OBIB are cross-sectional averages and are multiplied by $1 0 ^ { 5 }$ , $1 0 ^ { 1 2 }$ , and ${ 1 0 } ^ { 9 }$ , respectively, in order to adjust the units for presentation. The numbers in parentheses are the cross-sectional averages of $t \cdot$ -statistics. In the results for OFIB#, OFIB¥, and OBIB, the first numbers in brackets indicate the fraction of firms whose coefficients are significant at the $5 \%$ level. The second numbers in brackets refer to the fraction of firms whose coefficients are positive. The sample spans from September 1, 2006 to August 31, 2007 for all Nikkei 225 individual stocks listed on August 31, 2007. The sample size is 23,216.

<table><tr><td colspan="10">Dependent variable: the midpoint return</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="4">Quartiles of firms by market capitalization</td><td colspan="3"></td><td colspan="4"></td></tr><tr><td>Explanatory variable</td><td colspan="3">1st quartile (smallest group)</td><td colspan="3">2nd quartile</td><td colspan="3">3rd quartile</td><td colspan="3">4th quartile (largest group)</td></tr><tr><td>Midpoint return t-1</td><td>-0.049 (-7.18)</td><td>-0.049 (-6.94) [0.84]</td><td>-0.041 (-6.32) [0.82]</td><td>-0.038 (-5.52) [0.88]</td><td>-0.037 (-5.23) [0.88]</td><td>-0.031 (-4.73) [0.87]</td><td>-0.047 (-6.93) [0.92]</td><td>-0.047 (-6.64) [0.96]</td><td>-0.042 (-6.47) [0.90]</td><td>-0.059 (-8.74) [0.96]</td><td>-0.061 (-8.68) [0.94]</td><td>-0.050 (-7.67) [0.92]</td></tr><tr><td>OFIB#t-1</td><td>[0.84] 1.307 (3.69)</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.852 (3.38)</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.547 (2.77) [0.81, 0.85]</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.926 (5.37)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>OFIB¥1-1</td><td>[0.65, 0.80]</td><td>2.263 (2.49)</td><td></td><td>[0.65, 0.88]</td><td>0.561 (1.85)</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.074</td><td></td><td>[0.75, 0.87]</td><td>0.221</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>OBIB-1</td><td></td><td>[0.55, 0.75]</td><td>1.238</td><td></td><td>[0.58, 0.77]</td><td>15.45</td><td></td><td>(1.06) [0.65, 0.75]</td><td></td><td></td><td>(3.35) [0.69, 0.85]</td><td>20.85</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3"></td><td colspan="9"></td><td>26.49</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="3">(3.23) [0.61, 0.84]</td><td colspan="3">(3.39) [0.58, 0.92]</td><td colspan="3">(3.31)</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>[0.75, 0.90]</td><td></td><td></td><td>(4.84) [0.73, 0.92]</td></tr><tr><td>Adjusted R2</td><td>0.0042 0.0036</td><td>0.0039</td><td></td><td>0.0026</td><td>0.0021</td><td>0.0025</td><td>0.0037</td><td>0.0030</td><td>0.0034</td><td>0.005</td><td>0.0039 0.0046</td></tr></table>

# 3. Technical Trading Rules

This section introduces the six types of technical trading rules investigated in this paper. The first two are formulated based on the order-flow and order-book imbalances that have not thus far been developed and investigated in the literature on technical analysis. The next four are trading rules based upon past prices that are typically utilized in previous academic papers on technical analysis, namely filter rules, moving averages (MAs), trading range breaks, and channel breakouts. These six types are examined using a variety of different parameter values. The total number of rules amounts to 5,081. As pointed out in Hansen (2003), we need a large number of trading rules in order to adjust for data-snooping biases; however, the inclusion of too many irrelevant rules leads to a decrease in the power of the test.23

We utilize the mid-quote and transaction prices and show the results of the performances of technical trading independently. In evaluating trading performances using transaction prices, we assume that investors buy a share at the prevailing best ask upon observing a buy signal and sell it at the best bid when our technical rules instruct us to do so.24 When using the mid-quote price, we assume that investors transact shares at the midquote price. The transaction price incorporates the bid-ask spread, a type of transaction cost that real investors incur when trading shares. Mid-quote prices are free from the costs arising from the bid-ask spread. Thus, we analyze the profitability of our technical strategies both with and without the transaction costs incurred from the bid-ask spread. In addition, we consider our order size to be small enough that our investors do not influence the transaction records of our dataset. We sample returns in 5-minute intervals, implying that our technical traders look at price and order information every 5 minutes and derive trading signals for each interval. In the following subsections, we describe each of these six rules.

# 3.1. Imbalance-based technical rules

We define the technical rules from the order-flow and order-book imbalances based on the results presented in the previous section, namely positive and significant relations between returns and the most recent imbalances. As described in the previous section, we focus on two types of order-flow imbalance variables: $O F I B \# _ { t } =$ the number of sellerinitiated trades subtracted from the number of buyer-initiated trades and $O F I B \mathcal { E } _ { t } =$ the Yen amounts received by sellers subtracted from the Yen amounts paid by buyers. $O F I B \# _ { t }$ is expressed in billions of Yen for our analysis. The order-book imbalance ( OBIBt ) encompasses the difference between the market depths of the buy side and those of the sell side at the end of each 5-minute interval and is expressed in millions of Yen. Each of the imbalance-based technical rules is described below.

# 3.1.1. Technical rules for the order-flow imbalance

The technical rules for order-flow imbalances indicate that a buy signal is observed when the most recent order-flow imbalance is positive by a fixed amount, $\alpha$ , while a sell signal is extracted when the order-flow imbalance becomes negative by that same amount $\alpha$ Once a trading signal has been observed, investors are assumed to trade the share immediately and to keep the position until the opposite signal appears. A different version of the rule is also considered. Following Brock, Lakonishok, and LeBaron (1992), once a signal has been extracted, a given long or short position is held over $c$ periods, ignoring all other signals observed during that time.25

# 3.1.2. Technical rules for the order-book imbalance

The trading strategy involving a trade-off between immediate execution and the favorable execution price asks investors to submit more aggressive orders (market orders) as the order book becomes thicker compared with the other side and to place less aggressive orders (limit orders) as the book becomes thinner. We evaluate the following three orderbook imbalance strategies. First, an investor is always aggressive and thus a buy signal is extracted when the current depth of the buy side becomes thicker than that of the sell-side by $\omega$ , and vice versa.26,27 The investor immediately buys a share at the prevailing best ask and sells it at the best bid.

For the second type of order-book imbalance strategy, we assume that an investor is always passive and thus observes a buy signal when the order-book imbalance becomes negative by $\omega$ and extracts a sell signal when the imbalance is positive by $\omega$ . We assume that a passive trader, who observed a buy signal, places a limit order to buy at the prevailing best bid price, waiting to be hit by a market sell order in the future. The passive trader places a limit order to sell at the best ask and waits for it to be executed with a market buy order to be placed in the future.28 Passive traders are also referred to as limit order traders.

The passive traders (limit order traders) sampled in this study may obtain a favorable execution price, but they face two risks, namely the risk of non-execution and that of pickingoff. The risk of non-execution arises because limit orders are subject to price and time priority rules, as they are in the real stock exchange. Since a trader places it at the best quotes, his/her order has a higher priority to be executed compared with limit orders at other prices. However, orders at the best prices that were placed before his/her order have a higher priority to be executed than his/her order, possibly causing his/her orders not to be executed. This circumstance indicates that the passive or limit order traders in this study can avoid the cost of a bid-ask spread and acquire a favorable price if their orders are executed, but face the risk of non-execution. This risk of non-execution increases with the advent of favorable news, encouraging traders to place limit orders before our limit order trader. The second risk that our passive or limit order traders face is a so-called picking-off risk, which refers to a situation in which the market price crosses the limit price set by our passive traders and the order is not cancelled. Under these conditions, someone can “pick off” their order and make money, meaning that our passive traders are likely lose money in such a case. For example, the passive traders in the present study lose money when the best ask price falls below the price at which the shares were bought after someone picks them off.

We determine when the orders that are submitted by our passive traders are executed as follows. We utilize the fact that in our sample all trades were conducted at the best prices to determine the execution time. On one hand, we first record how many limit orders exist at the requested price when the trader places a limit order at the best price. We look at the actual transaction record and determine the execution time of the order when the trades at his/her requested price have accumulated at least the amount recorded since the order was placed. The order will not be executed if the trades do not exceed the units recorded during our sample periods. On the other hand, the execution time of the limit order is also recorded when a certain number of market orders reach a price outside the requested price. Since all trades are conducted at the best prices in our sample, if trades occur outside the limit price, all of the orders before the trader at the same limit price should have been executed or cancelled, and his/her limit order should be executed.

The actual transaction time may differ, as limit orders can be executed during the call auction system. The Tokyo Stock Exchange switches execution systems between the continuous double auction, which is used after the opening session and before the closing session, and the call auction system used during opening and closing sessions. This paper only considers the period of continuous double auction so that all technical rules fall into the same trading hours.29

We assume that limit orders are cancelled in 216 5-minute intervals, amounting to 4 business days under a normal operation. Japanese stock market investors can place limit orders by means of Japanese security companies; the number of days by which their limit orders are cancelled by these security companies depends upon the security companies chosen. For example, Money Inc. allows limit orders to remain in the order book for a maximum of 30 days, Kabu.com Securities allows them to stay for three weeks, whereas

Matsui Securities and Rakuten Securities cancel limit orders at the end of the last business day of a week.30, 31

The third type of order-book imbalance strategy randomly assigns an investor to be either an aggressive trader or a passive trader at every time $t$ . All aggressive and passive traders hold an open position after they buy or sell a share until the opposite trading signal emerges. In addition, we consider these strategies to have a fixed length $c$ in which traders ignore all signals once they have a position.

Our set-up for these order-book imbalance strategies indicates that both sides of the book are important in determining an agent’s order choice, which is consistent with the results of the theoretical work conducted by Parlour (1998) and the empirical findings of Duong, Kalev, and Krishnamurti (2009), Griffiths, Smith, Turnbull, and White (2000), and Ranaldo (2004).

Kavajecz and Odders-White (2004) also present empirical evidence that relates the technical rules to the state of the limit order book. However, our approach is different from theirs. Kavajecz and Odders-White (2004) investigate the technical rules for obtaining information about the limit order book. For example, they show that support and resistance levels coincide with the peaks in the depth of the limit order book and that moving average forecasts reveal information about the relative positions of the book depth. In our paper, investors can refer to the order book directly and they formulate technical rules based on information used to predict future prices.

# 3.2. Price-based technical rules

The standard $x$ percent filter rule is defined as follows. A buy (sell) signal is extracted if the price of a particular security increases (decreases) by at least $x$ percent from the subsequent low (high). Once a buy (sell) signal has been observed, traders buy (sell) and hold (go short) until the next sell (buy) signal has been extracted. The subsequent low (high) is the lowest (highest) price achieved while taking a short (long) position. In addition to the standard filter rule, we consider the following versions of filter rules. First, we use an alternative definition of high (low), calculating the highest (lowest) price over the previous periods $e$ , excluding the current price. The second version defines the rule that generates a buy signal when the price increases by at least $x$ percent from the subsequent low, but the sell signal has been observed when the price decreases by at least $y$ percent from the subsequent high. Third, we set a period, $c$ , during which traders ignore any signal received after they have traded shares.32

The standard moving average (MA) rule generates a buy (sell) signal when the price exceeds (penetrates downward) the MA over $n$ periods. Once a buy (sell) signal has been observed, traders hold a long (short) position until the next sell (buy) signal has been extracted. Different versions of MA rules are also considered. First, a buy (sell) signal is observed when a fast MA exceeds (penetrates downward) a slow MA, where a slow MA refers to the average over longer periods compared with a fast MA. Second, a fixed band filter is imposed on the standard MA rule. In other words, traders observe a buy (sell) signal when the price (or a fast MA) exceeds a MA (or a slow MA) by a fixed multiplicative amount, $b$ . Third, the time delay filter is considered. Traders take a particular action only in $d$ periods after the signal has been extracted. Fourth, traders take a position for $c$ periods, while ignoring any signal during these periods.33

A buy (sell) signal is produced in a simple trading range break rule when the price exceeds (is less than) the maximum (minimum) price over the previous $^ { t b }$ periods. We also consider a fixed multiplicative band filter, $b$ , and a time delay filter, $d$ . In addition, traders hold positions for $c$ periods, ignoring all signals produced during these periods.34

The last type of trading rule is channel breakouts. Traders buy (sell) and hold a long (short) position when the price exceeds (falls below) the channel, where a channel is produced when the high over the previous $c b$ periods is within $x b$ percent of the low over the previous $c b$ periods. In addition, different versions of the channel breakout rules are analyzed by imposing a fixed multiplicative band filter, $b$ , and a fixed number of periods that a position is held, c.35, 36

# 4. White’s Reality Check and Hansen’s Superior Predictive Ability

This paper applies White’s Reality Check and Hansen’s Superior Predictive Ability test in order to evaluate trading performances as well as to account for potential data-

snooping biases. This section first introduces the Reality Check and then the Superior Predictive Ability test.

# 4.1. The Reality Check

Based on the methods of Diebold and Mariano (1995) and West (1996), White (2000) presents the testing procedure for whether a given model has predictive superiority over a benchmark model after accounting for data-snooping effects. White’s (2000) Reality Check can be applied to test the profitability of the best trading rule. It tests the null hypothesis that the profit generated by the best trading rule does not exceed that of a benchmark strategy and gives an estimate of the true and nominal $p$ -values for the null hypothesis by means of bootstrapping simulations. The true $p$ -value is a statistic that is adjusted for data snooping by taking into account the entire universe of rules where the best rule is selected. Thus, this $p$ - value indicates the significance of the profitability of the best rule in the universe of all trading rules. The nominal $p$ -value is the significance calculated by re-sampling with replacements the returns in the best trading rule alone. This value ignores the effect of data snooping. Therefore, the difference between true and nominal $p$ -values represents the magnitude of the data-snooping biases.

Applying White’s Reality Check procedure to the Dow Jones Industrial Average and S&P 500 datasets, Sullivan, Timmerman, and White (1999) provide empirical evidence of the profitability of the best trading rule among a wide set of trading rules. The performance statistic for each trading rule is given by the following:

$$
\bar { f } _ { k } = T ^ { - 1 } \sum _ { t = 1 } ^ { T } f _ { k , t + 1 } \ k { = } I , . . . . , M ,
$$

where $M$ refers to the number of technical trading rules and $T$ is the number of trading periods, while $f _ { k , t + 1 }$ encompasses the performance measure observed at $t { + } l$ . In our

application, $M$ is equal to 5,081 and $t$ is the smallest time step (5-minute interval). The performance measure $f _ { k , t + 1 }$ is defined as follows:

$$
f _ { k , t + 1 } = r _ { t + 1 } S _ { k } \mathopen { } \mathclose \bgroup \left( P _ { t } , \beta _ { k } \aftergroup \egroup \right) - r _ { t + 1 } S _ { 0 } \mathopen { } \mathclose \bgroup \left( P _ { t } , \beta _ { 0 } \aftergroup \egroup \right)
$$

where $P _ { t }$ refers to the original price series. Here, $S _ { k } ( \bullet )$ and $S _ { 0 } ( \bullet )$ are signal functions that map the price information to trading signals, which take 1 to represent a long position, $^ { - 1 }$ to represent a short position, and 0 to represent a neutral position. The performance measure, $f _ { k , t + 1 }$ ,encompasses the excess returns of a trading rule, $k ,$ , from a benchmark return. Benchmark returns are the returns from a long position for all periods.

We test the null hypothesis that the returns from the best technical trading rule are no better than those from the benchmark strategy. In other words:

$$
H _ { 0 } : \operatorname* { m a x } _ { k = 1 , \ldots , M } \left\{ \bar { f } _ { k } \right\} \leq 0
$$

The rejection of the null hypothesis implies that the best trading rule results in a higher performance compared with the benchmark strategy.

In White (2000), the null hypothesis can be evaluated by applying the stationary bootstrapping of Politis and Romano (1994) to the observed value of $f _ { k , t + 1 }$ . We thus derive the Reality Check $p$ -value in order to test the fact that the best rule offers a superior performance than does the benchmark. First, for each trading rule, we re-sample $f _ { k , t + 1 }$ with the replacement $B$ times and denote the re-sampled series as $f _ { k , t + 1 , b } ^ { * }$ $( b { = } I , . . . . , B )$ . Second, we calculate the average of the bootstrap returns as follows:

$$
\bar { f } _ { k , b } ^ { * } = T ^ { - 1 } { \sum _ { t = 1 } ^ { T } } f _ { k , t , b } ^ { * } \mathrm { ~  ~ { ~ \cal ~ b = l , . . . . , B } } .
$$

We set $B { = } 5 0 0$ and then formulate the following statistics:

$$
\overline { { V } } = \operatorname* { m a x } _ { k = 1 , \ldots , M } \left[ \sqrt { T } \bar { f } _ { k } \right]
$$

$$
\overline { { V } } _ { b } ^ { * } = \operatorname* { m a x } _ { k = 1 , \ldots , M } \left[ \sqrt { T } \left( \bar { f } _ { k , b } ^ { * } - \bar { f } _ { k } \right) \right] \quad b { = } I , . . . . , B
$$

White’s Reality Check $p$ -value is obtained by comparing $\bar { V }$ and $\overline { { V } } _ { b } ^ { * }$ . In particular, we sort out

$\overline { { V _ { b } ^ { * } } } ( b { = } I , . . . , B )$ and denote it as:

$$
\overline { { { V } } } _ { S ( 1 ) } ^ { * } , \overline { { { V } } } _ { S ( 2 ) } ^ { * } , . . . . . , \overline { { { V } } } _ { S ( B ) } ^ { * } .
$$

Next, we find $N$ such that $\overline { { { V } } } _ { S ( N ) } ^ { * } \leq \overline { { { V } } } < \overline { { { V } } } _ { S ( N + 1 ) } ^ { * } .$ . White’s Reality Check $p$ -value is given as:

$$
p - \nu a l u e = 1 - N _ { \bigstar }
$$

We then selected a smoothing parameter, denoted as $q$ , equal to 0.1.37

# 4.2. Superior Predictive Ability

Hansen (2005) points out two drawbacks of White’s Reality Check test. First, the null distribution is obtained under a configuration that is least favorable to the alternative. As a result, the testing power of the Reality Check deteriorates significantly when poor and irrelevant alternatives are included in the analysis. Second, the Reality Check aims to evaluate the return performances of the models but fails to consider any risk features. Hansen (2005) thus establishes the Superior Predictive Ability test in order to deal with these two problems. The Superior Predictive Ability test employs a studentized test statistic that reduces the influence of erratic forecasts; thus, the test evaluates the risk-adjusted performance of the technical rules. In particular, equation (7) is written as:

$$
\overline { { V } } = \operatorname* { m a x } \left( \operatorname* { m a x } _ { k = 1 , \ldots , M } \frac { \sqrt { T } \bar { f } _ { k } } { \hat { \sigma } _ { k } } , 0 \right)
$$

where $\hat { \sigma } _ { k }$ refers to the standard deviation of $\sqrt { T } \bar { f } _ { k }$ . As proposed by Politis and Romano (1994) and Shynkevich (2012), $\hat { \sigma } _ { k }$ is computed according to the following:

$$
\hat { \sigma } _ { k } ^ { 2 } = \hat { \gamma } _ { 0 , k } + 2 \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { T - 1 } \kappa \big ( T , i \big ) \hat { \gamma } _ { i , k }
$$

where:

$$
\hat { \gamma } _ { i , k } = T ^ { - 1 } \sum _ { t = 1 } ^ { T - i } \bigl ( f _ { k , t } - \bar { f } _ { k } \bigr ) \bigl ( f _ { k , t + i } - \bar { f } _ { k } \bigr ) , i = 0 , I , . . . , T - I
$$

and

$$
\kappa ( T , i ) = \frac { T - i } { T } \bigl ( 1 - q \bigr ) ^ { i } + \frac { i } { T } \bigl ( 1 - q \bigr ) ^ { T - i }
$$

In Hansen’s procedure, the null distribution is re-centered in order to obtain the distribution of the test statistic. First, the average of the centered returns is calculated as follows:

$$
\overline { { R } } _ { k , b } ^ { * } = \bar { f } _ { k , b } ^ { * } - \bar { f } _ { k } I
$$

where I is an indicator function that takes 1 if $\frac { \sqrt { T } \bar { f } _ { k } } { \hat { \sigma } _ { k } } \geq - \sqrt { 2 \ln \ln T }$ and 0 otherwise. This leads to a consistent estimator of the asymptotic distribution of the test statistic, which improves the power of the test, as shown in Hansen (2005).

The SPA’s $p$ -values are determined by the bootstrapped distribution as follows:

$$
\overline { { V } } _ { b } ^ { * } = \operatorname* { m a x } \left( \operatorname* { m a x } _ { k = 1 , \ldots , M } \frac { \sqrt { T } \overline { { R } } _ { k , b } ^ { * } } { \hat { \sigma } _ { k } } , 0 \right) , \quad b = I , . . . . , B
$$

Hansen (2005) suggests showing the upper and lower bounds of the $p$ -values, which are, respectively, calculated utilizing the following:

$$
\begin{array} { r } { \overline { { R } } _ { k , b } ^ { L * } = \bar { f } _ { k , b } ^ { * } - \operatorname* { m a x } \mathopen { } \mathclose \bgroup \left( \bar { f } _ { k } , 0 \aftergroup \egroup \right) , \quad b = I , . . . . , B } \end{array}
$$

and

$$
\overline { { R } } _ { k , b } ^ { U * } = \bar { f } _ { k , b } ^ { * } - \bar { f } _ { k } , \quad b { = } I , . . . . , B
$$

This section demonstrates that both our price-based and our imbalance-based technical strategies underperform the buy-and-hold strategy. The trading performance of the price-based technical rules exclusively for imbalance-based strategies are examined and then evaluated by including the imbalance-based technical rules in order to compare the profitability achieved following price-based technical rules with that of imbalance-based technical strategies. This is also meant to highlight any impact of imbalance-based technical strategies upon their trading performances.

We first utilize the mid-quote prices (which are prices free from a transaction cost arising from a bid-ask spread, commission fee, or any other transaction costs) and then the transaction prices (prices with a transaction cost from the bid-ask spread) in order to evaluate the profitability of price-based trading strategies. We demonstrate that the price- and the imbalance-based trading strategies fail to produce positive excess returns over the buy-andhold strategy when the effect of data snooping is taken into account. These results hold for both mid-quote and transaction prices. At the end of this section, we demonstrate the robustness of this result using a different sample period of higher return volatility, in which extra risk may be added to dynamic trading strategies, generating a higher risk premium and thus greater predictability.38

# 5.1. Mid-quote prices

Table 4 summarizes the performances of the best rule for the 207 stocks using midquote prices. Moving average rules are selected for most stocks $5 9 . 6 { - } 7 8 . 8 \%$ of the firms). Filter rules are more likely to serve as the best rules for smaller-sized groups $2 1 . 6 \%$ for the 1st quartile, $1 9 . 2 \%$ for the 2nd quartile group, $7 . 7 \%$ for the 3rd quartile, and $5 . 8 \%$ for the largest-sized group). However, trading range break rules are more likely to be chosen as the size increases. For example, $1 7 . 3 \%$ of the largest group, $1 1 . 5 \%$ of the 2nd and 3rd groups, and only $5 . 9 \%$ of the smallest group select trading range break rules. Channel breakout rules produce the best results for a small number of the firms, ranging from $1 . 9 \%$ to $9 . 6 \%$ in each group.

The average number of trades for the best rules amount to approximately 1,000 to 1,200, while the mean returns of the best trading rule are usually positive. These range from 0.030/1000 to 0.036/1000. However, the results from the Reality Check and the Superior Predictive Ability tests indicate that the returns generated from the best rules are not large enough to beat the buy-and-hold strategy. The nominal $p$ -values are also small for many of the stocks, and this tendency is more pronounced in smaller-sized groups. For example, $7 2 . 5 \%$ and $8 0 . 4 \%$ of the firms in the smallest group generate excess returns from the best rules over the buy-and-hold rule at the $5 \%$ significance level, according to White’s and Hansen’s nominal $p$ -values, respectively, compared with $3 2 . 7 \%$ and $5 3 . 8 \%$ of the firms in the largest group. However, the percentages of the significant best rules dramatically decrease once data-snooping issues are taken into account. Nearly all White’s and Hansen’s $p$ -values exceed 0.05 in any of the size groups. These results indicate that severe data-snooping biases affect the performance of the best trading rules and that they are no better than the buy-andhold strategy for our sample periods.

Qualitatively similar results are shown in Table 5 even when we additionally utilize the imbalance-based technical rules. For example, moving average rules are still selected as the best rules for most stocks $7 1 . 2 – 8 2 . 4 \%$ of the firms), while the order-imbalance technical rules are usually not $( 7 . 7 \mathrm { - } 1 1 . 7 \%$ of the firms). The numbers of trades range from 931.3 to 1233.2, while average returns are similar (0.030/1000) to those values shown in Table 4.

Limit order traders execute their orders at more favorable prices than mid-quotes if traded. However, the technical analysis with the mid-quote prices does not consider this advantage. The next subsection utilizes the transaction cost for dealing with this issue.

Table 4: Performance of the Best Trading Rule among “price-based technical rules”: Mid-quote prices We examine the profitability of “price-based technical rules” utilizing White’s Reality Check and Hansen’s Superior Predictive Ability. We use mid-quote prices, which are free from a transaction cost from the bid-ask spread. Returns are those over 5-minute intervals. The numbers without parentheses and brackets are the average $p$ -values within each quartile group. The numbers in parentheses are the standard deviations of the $p$ - values, while those in brackets are the fractions of firms that rejected the null hypothesis of the non-predictability of the best rule over the buyand-hold strategy at the $5 \%$ significance level. Trading rules are denoted as follows: F (Filter rule), MA (Moving averages), TRB (Trading range break), and CB (Channel breakouts). Returns are multiplied by $1 0 ^ { 3 }$ in order to adjust the units for presentation. The sample spans from September 1, 2006 to August 31, 2007 for 207 Nikkei 225 individual stocks listed on August 31, 2007. The sample size is 23,217.   

<table><tr><td colspan="6"></td><td colspan="6">p-values</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Best rule</td><td># of trades</td><td>Returns</td><td>White nominal</td><td>White real</td><td>Hansen nominal</td><td>Hansen consistent</td><td>Hansen upper</td><td>Hansen lower</td></tr><tr><td>1st quartile (smallest group)</td><td>F: MA: TRB: CB:</td><td>21.6% 68.6% 5.9% 3.9%</td><td>1202.2 (1002.1)</td><td>0.036 (0.014)</td><td>0.039 (0.051) [0.725]</td><td>0.413 (0.241) [0.039]</td><td>0.028 (0.036) [0.804]</td><td>0.449 (0.255) [0.039]</td><td>0.450 (0.255)</td><td>0.383 (0.222)</td></tr><tr><td>2nd quartile</td><td>F: MA: TRB: CB:</td><td>19.2% 59.6% 11.5% 9.6%</td><td>1007.8 (842.4)</td><td>0.033 (0.013)</td><td>0.049 (0.059) [0.654]</td><td>0.461 (0.255) [0]</td><td>0.036 (0.047) [0.750]</td><td>0.490 (0.281) [0.019]</td><td>0.491 (0.281)</td><td>0.418 (0.246)</td></tr><tr><td>3rd quartile</td><td>F: MA: TRB: CB:</td><td>7.7% 78.8% 11.5% 1.9%</td><td>1174.1 (1124.9)</td><td>0.031 (0.012)</td><td>0.082 (0.077) [0.385]</td><td>0.556 (0.274) [0.058]</td><td>0.058 (0.060) [0.50]</td><td>0.623 (0.290) [0.058]</td><td>0.625 (0.291)</td><td>0.539 (0.259)</td></tr><tr><td>4th quartile (largest group)</td><td>F: MA: TRB:</td><td>5.8% 75.0% 17.3%</td><td>1100.5 (1055.7)</td><td>0.030 (0.011)</td><td>0.097 (0.085) [0.327]</td><td>0.614 (0.265) [0.038]</td><td>0.058 (0.056) [0.538]</td><td>0.628 (0.280) [0.038]</td><td>0.629 (0.281)</td><td>0.539 (0.253)</td></tr></table>

Table 5: Performance of the Best Trading Rule among “order-imbalance and price-based technical rules”: Mid-quote prices We examine the profitability of “order-imbalance and price-based technical rules” utilizing White’s Reality Check and Hansen’s Superior Predictive Ability. We use transaction prices that incorporate a transaction cost from the bid-ask spread. Returns are those over 5-minute intervals. The numbers without parentheses and brackets refer to the average $p$ -values within each quartile group. The numbers in parentheses are the standard deviations of the $p$ -values, while those in brackets are the fractions of firms that rejected the null hypothesis of the non-predictability of the best rule over the buy-and-hold strategy at the $5 \%$ significance level. Trading rules are denoted as follows: $O F I B \#$ (Imbalance rule of order flows in numbers), OFIB¥ (Imbalance rule of order flows in Yen), OBIB (Order-book imbalance rule), F (Filter rule), MA (Moving averages), TRB (Trading range break), and CB (Channel breakouts). Numbers in returns are multiplied by $1 0 ^ { 3 }$ in order to adjust the units for presentation. The sample spans from September 1, 2006 to August 31, 2007 for 207 Nikkei 225 individual stocks listed on August 31, 2007. The sample size is 23,217.   

<table><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>White</td><td colspan="6">p-values</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Best rule</td><td># of trades</td><td>Returns</td><td>White nominal</td><td>real</td><td>Hansen nominal</td><td>Hansen consistent</td><td>Hansen upper</td><td>Hansen lower</td></tr><tr><td>1st quartile (smallest group)</td><td>OFIB#: OFIBH:</td><td>3.9% 0%</td><td>1233.2 (1168.2)</td><td>0.035</td><td>0.044</td><td>0.481</td><td>0.041</td><td>0.460 (0.254)</td><td>0.565</td><td>0.384</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OBIB: F:</td><td>7.8%</td><td></td><td>(0.012)</td><td>(0.0056) [0.745]</td><td>(0.248) [0.039]</td><td>(0.056) [0.804]</td><td>[0.039]</td><td>(0.275)</td><td>(0.215)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MA:</td><td>0% 82.4%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>TRB:</td><td>3.9%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CB:</td><td>2%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2nd quartile</td><td>OFIB#:</td><td>0%</td><td>940.0</td><td>0.033</td><td>0.057</td><td>0.512</td><td>0.061</td><td>0.503</td><td>0.610</td><td>0.418</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OFIBH:</td><td>0%</td><td>(832.6)</td><td>(0.011)</td><td>(0.078)</td><td>(0.239)</td><td>(0.139)</td><td>(0.238)</td><td>(0.256)</td><td>(0.206)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OBIB:</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>9.6%</td><td></td><td></td><td>[0.654]</td><td>[0]</td><td>[0.692]</td><td>[0]</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>F:</td><td>0%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MA:</td><td>71.2%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>TRB:</td><td>13.5%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CB:</td><td>5.8%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3rd quartile</td><td>OFIB#:</td><td>1.9%</td><td>1205.1</td><td>0.031</td><td>0.080</td><td>0.594</td><td>0.076</td><td>0.598</td><td>0.705</td><td>0.498</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OFIBE:</td><td>0%</td><td>(1196.0)</td><td>(0.012)</td><td>(0.084)</td><td>(0.283)</td><td>(0.080)</td><td>(0.275)</td><td>(0.291)</td><td>(0.231)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OBIB:</td><td>5.8%</td><td></td><td></td><td>[0.462]</td><td>[0.058]</td><td>[0.519]</td><td>0.058]</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>F:</td><td>0%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MA:</td><td>80.8%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>TRB:</td><td>9.6%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CB:</td><td>1.9%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OFIB#:</td><td>3.8%</td><td>931.3</td><td>0.030</td><td>0.088</td><td>0.654</td><td>0.086</td><td>0.638</td><td>0.752</td><td>0.538</td></tr><tr><td>4th quartile (largest group)</td><td>OFIBH:</td><td></td><td>(1027.3)</td><td></td><td>(0.077)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OBIB:</td><td>0% 7.7%</td><td></td><td>(0.010)</td><td>[0.346]</td><td>(0.268)</td><td>(0.075)</td><td>(0.269)</td><td>(0.284)</td><td>(0.233)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>F:</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.01]</td><td>[0.346]</td><td>0.038]</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>0%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MA:</td><td>73.1%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>TRB:</td><td>13.5%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>1.9%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CB:</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

# 5.2. Transaction prices: a transaction cost from the bid-ask spread

We next present the results of the trading performances resulting from the application of price-based technical rules utilizing transaction prices. Table 6 summarizes the results. As seen in Table 4, moving average rules are still more likely to be selected as the best rules, but the channel breakout rules are the next most popular rules selected by all size groups. The number of trades under the best rules range from 23.6 to 40.2 on average across the four size groups. The mean returns are lower than those for the mid-quote returns because the transaction prices incorporate the transaction cost arising from the bid-ask spread. Since returns are lower, the trading performance resulting from following the best rules is significantly worse than that achieved using mid-quote prices. None of the best rules outperforms the buy-and-hold strategy when the effect of data snooping is taken into consideration.

Next, we demonstrate that order-imbalance technical rules also fail to generate significant excess returns over the buy-and-hold strategy. In Table 7, moving average rules can be seen to have remained the most popular strategy among all size groups, which are selected for $3 4 . 6 { - } 5 0 \%$ of firms. Order-book imbalance rules are the next most common rules selected for $2 1 . 2 { - } 2 8 . 8 \%$ of stocks. Order-flow imbalance rules are selected by $2 1 . 1 \%$ of the firms in the largest group, while they are chosen by $5 . 7 \mathrm { - } 1 1 . 8 \%$ of the firms in other size groups. The number of trades amounts to approximately 48.7–61.2 during our sample period, and returns, ranging from 0.022/1000 to 0.024/1000 on average, are similar to those generated from price-based rules, as observed in Table 6. However, we find that the best rules always turn out not to be profitable once data-snooping biases are taken into consideration, as Hansen’s real $p$ -values do not fall below the $5 \%$ significance level for all firms in all size groups.

Table 6: Performance of the Best Trading Rule among “price-based technical rules”: Transaction prices We examine the profitability of “price-based technical rules” utilizing White’s Reality Check and Hansen’s Superior Predictive Ability. We use transaction prices that incorporate a transaction cost from the bid-ask spread. Returns are those over 5-minute intervals. The numbers without parentheses and brackets refer to the average $p$ -values within each quartile group. The numbers in parentheses are the standard deviations of the $p$ -values, while those in brackets are the fractions of firms that rejected the null hypothesis of the non-predictability of the best rule over the buyand-hold strategy at the $5 \%$ significance level. Trading rules are denoted as follows: F (Filter rule), MA (Moving averages), TRB (Trading range break), and CB (Channel breakouts). Numbers in returns are multiplied by $1 0 ^ { 3 }$ in order to adjust the units for presentation. The sample spans from September 1, 2006 to August 31, 2007 for 207 Nikkei 225 individual stocks listed on August 31, 2007. The sample size is 23,217.   

<table><tr><td colspan="6"></td><td colspan="6">p-values</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Best rule</td><td>5.9%</td><td># of trades</td><td>Returns</td><td>White nominal</td><td>White real</td><td>Hansen nominal</td><td>Hansen consistent</td><td>Hansen upper</td><td>Hansen lower</td></tr><tr><td>1st quartile (smallest group)</td><td>F: MA: TRB: CB:</td><td>66.7% 2.0% 25.5%</td><td>40.2 (66.5)</td><td>0.021 (0.010)</td><td>0.159 (0.128) [0.176]</td><td>0.736 (0.245) [0]</td><td>0.145 (0.130) [0.216]</td><td>0.683 (0.239) [0]</td><td>0.815 (0.222)</td><td>0.561 (0.212)</td></tr><tr><td>2nd quartile</td><td>F: MA: TRB: CB:</td><td>9.6% 65.4% 1.9% 23.1%</td><td>39.5 (73.7)</td><td>0.022 (0.009)</td><td>0.154 (0.114) [0.192]</td><td>0.732 (0.219) [0]</td><td>0.140 (0.115) [0.212]</td><td>0.706 (0.200) [0]</td><td>0.841 (0.169)</td><td>0.573 (0.170)</td></tr><tr><td>3rd quartile</td><td>F: MA: TRB: CB:</td><td>3.8% 73.1% 1.9% 21.2%</td><td>23.6 (30.4)</td><td>0.020 (0.011)</td><td>0.201 (0.134) [0.154]</td><td>0.790 (0.238) [0]</td><td>0.202 (0.165) [0.173]</td><td>0.774 (0.216) [0]</td><td>0.876 (0.194)</td><td>0.635 (0.199)</td></tr><tr><td>4th quartile (largest group)</td><td>F: MA: TRB: CB:</td><td>13.5% 57.7% 3.8% 25.0%</td><td>33.8 (62.2)</td><td>0.019 (0.008)</td><td>0.215 (0.122) [0.058]</td><td>0.852 (0.155) [0]</td><td>0.209 (0.159) [0.096]</td><td>0.799 (0.151) [0]</td><td>0.923 (0.115)</td><td>0.649 (0.142)</td></tr></table>

Table 7: Performance of the Best Trading Rule among “order-imbalance and price-based technical rules”: Transaction prices We examine the profitability of “order-imbalance and price-based technical rules” utilizing White’s Reality Check and Hansen’s Superior Predictive Ability. We use transaction prices that incorporate a transaction cost from the bid-ask spread. Returns are those over 5-minute intervals. The numbers without parentheses and brackets refer to the average $p$ -values within each quartile group. The numbers in parentheses are the standard deviations of the $p$ -values, while those in brackets are the fractions of firms that rejected the null hypothesis of the non-predictability of the best rule over the buy-and-hold strategy at the $5 \%$ significance level. Trading rules are denoted as follows: $O F I B \#$ (Imbalance rule of order flows in numbers), OFIB¥ (Imbalance rule of order flows in Yen), OBIB (Order-book imbalance rule), F (Filter rule), MA (Moving averages), TRB (Trading range break), and CB (Channel breakouts). Numbers in returns are multiplied by $1 0 ^ { 3 }$ in order to adjust the units for presentation. The sample spans from September 1, 2006 to August 31, 2007 for 207 Nikkei 225 individual stocks listed on August 31, 2007. The sample size is 23,217.   

<table><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>White</td><td colspan="6">p-values</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Best rule</td><td># of trades</td><td>Returns</td><td>White nominal</td><td>real</td><td>Hansen nominal</td><td>Hansen consistent</td><td>Hansen upper</td><td>Hansen lower</td></tr><tr><td>1 st quartile</td><td>OFIB#:</td><td>9.8%</td><td>48.7</td><td>0.024</td><td>0.130</td><td>0.716</td><td>0.112</td><td>0.668</td><td>0.789</td><td>0.542</td></tr><tr><td>(smallest group)</td><td>OFIBH:</td><td>2%</td><td>(72.5)</td><td>(0.010)</td><td>(0..115)</td><td>(0.242)</td><td>(0.112)</td><td>(0.234)</td><td>(0.214)</td><td>(0.215)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OBIB:</td><td>27.5%</td><td></td><td></td><td>[0.275]</td><td>[0.020]</td><td>[0.333]</td><td>[0]</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>F:</td><td>2%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MA:</td><td>43.1%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>TRB:</td><td>2%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CB:</td><td>13.7%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2nd quartile</td><td>OFIB#:</td><td>9.6%</td><td>61.2</td><td>0.024</td><td>0.117</td><td>0.721</td><td>0.104</td><td>0.681</td><td>0.803</td><td>0.540</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OFIBH:</td><td>1.9%</td><td>(78.4)</td><td>(0.008)</td><td>(0.089)</td><td>(0.215)</td><td>(0.091)</td><td>(0.214)</td><td>(0.195)</td><td>(0.189)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OBIB:</td><td>28.8%</td><td></td><td></td><td>[0.269]</td><td>[0]</td><td>[0.308]</td><td>[0]</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>F:</td><td>5.8%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MA:</td><td>34.6%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>TRB:</td><td>1.9%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CB:</td><td>17.3%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3rd quartile</td><td>OFIB#:</td><td>3.8%</td><td>54.1</td><td>0.023</td><td>0.155</td><td>0.766</td><td>0.144</td><td>0.757</td><td>0.859</td><td>0.608</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OFIBE:</td><td>1.9%</td><td>(82.9)</td><td>(0.011)</td><td>(0.106)</td><td>(0.238)</td><td>(0.109)</td><td>(0.213)</td><td>(0.195)</td><td>(0.199)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OBIB:</td><td>28.8%</td><td></td><td></td><td>[0.135]</td><td>[0.019]</td><td>[0.192]</td><td>[0]</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>F:</td><td>1.9%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MA:</td><td>50.0%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>TRB:</td><td>1.9%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CB:</td><td>11.5%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4th quartile (largest</td><td>OFIB#:</td><td>19.2%</td><td>58.5</td><td>0.022</td><td>0.164</td><td>0.829</td><td>0.154</td><td>0.781</td><td>0.902</td><td>0.622</td></tr><tr><td>group)</td><td>OFIBH:</td><td>1.9%</td><td>(91.8)</td><td>(0.007)</td><td>(0.102)</td><td>(0.178)</td><td>(0.101)</td><td>(0.174)</td><td>(0.137)</td><td>(0.159)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OBIB:</td><td>21.2%</td><td></td><td></td><td>[0.135]</td><td>[0]</td><td>[0.154</td><td>[0]</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>F:</td><td>9.6%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MA:</td><td>38.5%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>TRB:</td><td>0%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CB:</td><td>9.6%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

The following five points should be emphasized regarding our results. First, if technical traders conduct intraday (5-minute) trading, past prices and the demand/supply in the order book do not provide information about achieving higher profits compared with those gained from the benchmark strategy. The non-profitability of the intraday technical analysis with the price-based rules is consistent with the results of Marshall, Cahan, and Cahan (2008), who utilize a composite price dataset of S&P’s Depository Receipts. Our results also indicate that even if stock investors conduct limit order trading on individual stocks, their trading performances will be no better than those achieved by means of the buyand-hold strategy. This non-profitability of limit order trading differs from the results in US markets presented by Handa and Schwartz (1996) and Harris and Hasbrouck (1996).

Second, Section 2.3 shows that, on one hand, the returns are predictable from the imbalances of order flows and the order book as well as from the past prices. On the other hand, consistent with the results on the short-horizon return predictability, the best technical rules based on those imbalances as well as past prices actually generate positive returns as shown in the column "Returns" in Table 7. However, Hansen's SPA test shows the nonprofitability of any technical rules, because the returns from the technical rules are too small and are not sufficiently larger than those from a buy-and-hold strategy.

In computing the White's Reality Check real $p$ -value or Hansen's SPA consistent $p$ - value, we bootstrap not only the returns of the best rules selected but also the returns of the other technical rules. Thus, if the returns from the best rule are not significantly larger than those from the buy-and-hold-strategy and the best rule is selected by pure chance, the value from equation (7) is not significantly large and the bootstrap procedures produce higher returns from certain other rules than those from the best rule. As a result, the bootstrap $p$ - value tends to exceed the significance level.

Third, our limit order traders generate lower trading performances than do the adherents of the buy-and-hold strategy during our sample periods, as the risks of nonexecution and picking-off, which are involved when submitting limit orders, are significantly large during our sample period. Fourth, the profits from the best rules in Table 7 are smaller than those without transaction costs as shown in Table 5. This means that the transaction costs contribute to reducing the profits from our technical rules.

Fifth, the difference in the results by firm size appears to be subtle once the datasnooping bias has been taken into account. The returns from the best rules are very close among all size groups, and none of the technical rules can beat the benchmark strategy for all size groups. The difference in the performance of different size groups is small, although Section 2.3 showed that returns are more likely to be predictable from order-flow and orderbook imbalances for larger size groups. The results imply that although it may be true that institutional herding or order splitting exists in our sample firms, the influences of institutional herding or order splitting upon technical trading profits are not distinguishable. Indeed, they are much smaller compared with the transaction costs arising from a bid-ask spread, the risk of non-execution, and the picking-off risk.

The next subsection demonstrates that our technical rules are still not profitable, even if our trading rules are analyzed in higher volatility periods than those considered in this subsection.

# 5.3. Trading profitability with a sample of higher volatility periods

LeBaron (1999) mentions that “high volatility periods might add extra risk to dynamic strategies implying a higher risk premium, and therefore greater predictability” (p. 139). Thus, choosing a different sample period with a higher level of return volatility may yield different results from those presented in the previous subsection. We thus select a different one-year period, covering September 1, 2005 to August 31, 2006, in which the daily TOPIX return volatility is $32 \%$ higher than that from September 1, 2006 to August 31, 2007.39 There are 247 trading days within this period. The same 207 individual stocks that were examined in the previous section are chosen.40 Transaction prices are utilized (so that the cost of the bidask spread is incorporated), as we examine the same 5,081 technical rules as those discussed in the previous subsection. Table 8 summarizes the results.

From Table 8, we can draw the same conclusion as we did in the previous subsection. The tables indicate that even periods with a potentially higher risk premium and thus greater predictability fail to add chances to our technical trading strategies for producing higher trading performances than those from a buy-and-hold strategy. The results imply that transaction costs, the risk of non-execution, and the picking-off risk are too large for our technical rules to outperform the buy-and-hold strategy.

Stock markets in several countries have recently experienced improvements in market transparency and transaction technology as well as lower transaction costs. These developments give traders greater chances in which to find and exploit profitable opportunities quickly. For example, in some stock exchanges, such as the Australian Stock Exchange, the London Stock Exchange, the NASDAQ, NYSE OpenBook, and the Tokyo Stock Exchange, all limit orders on both sides of the order book are observable prior to trading. Meanwhile, Euronext Paris, Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing, and the Toronto Stock Exchange show the best five bid/ask limit orders prior to trading. Owing to the development of transaction technology, stock investors can now send their orders to the electronic system and transact them quickly (and capture profit opportunities, assuming there are any). Lower transaction costs also facilitate the number of transactions. Thus, as several empirical papers on technical trading, such as that of Marshall, Cahan, and Cahan (2008), have indicated, it has recently become more challenging to make a profit in stock exchanges by means of intraday trading. Our results are consistent with their interpretations and furthermore imply that technical traders may need to trade more quickly than in 5-minute trading intervals before profitable chances, if there are any, disappear.

Table 8: Performance of the Best Trading Rule among “order-imbalance and price-based technical rules”: Transaction prices We examine the profitability of “order-imbalance and price-based technical rules” utilizing White’s Reality Check and Hansen’s Superior Predictive Ability. We use transaction prices that incorporate a transaction cost from the bid-ask spread. Returns are those over 5-minute intervals. The numbers without parentheses and brackets refer to the average $p$ -values within each quartile group. The numbers in parentheses are the standard deviations of the $p$ -values, while those in brackets are the fractions of firms that rejected the null hypothesis of the non-predictability of the best rule over the buy-and-hold strategy at the $5 \%$ significance level. Trading rules are denoted as follows: $O F I B \#$ (Imbalance rule of order flows in numbers), OFIB¥ (Imbalance rule of order flows in Yen), OBIB (Order-book imbalance rule), F (Filter rule), MA (Moving averages), TRB (Trading range break), and CB (Channel breakouts). Numbers in returns are multiplied by $1 0 ^ { 3 }$ in order to adjust the units for presentation. The sample spans from September 1, 2005 to August 31, 2006 for 207 Nikkei 225 individual stocks listed on August 31, 2007. The sample size is 23,217.   

<table><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>White</td><td colspan="6">p-values</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Best rule</td><td># of trades</td><td>Returns</td><td>White nominal</td><td>real</td><td>Hansen nominal</td><td>Hansen consistent</td><td>Hansen upper</td><td>Hansen lower</td></tr><tr><td>1st quartile</td><td>OFIB#:</td><td>11.8%</td><td>49.8</td><td>0.032</td><td>0.158</td><td>0.789</td><td>0.161</td><td>0.763</td><td>0.874</td><td>0.624</td></tr><tr><td>(smallest group)</td><td>FIBH</td><td>2% 15.7%</td><td>(60.1)</td><td>(0.016)</td><td>(0.157)</td><td>(0.208)</td><td>(0.194)</td><td>(0.215)</td><td>(0.180)</td><td>(0.210)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OBIB: F:</td><td>7.8%</td><td></td><td></td><td>[0.216]</td><td>[0]</td><td>[0.235]</td><td>[0]</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MA:</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>TRB:</td><td>58.8% 2%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CB:</td><td>2%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2nd quartile</td><td>OFIB#:</td><td>17.3%</td><td>59.5</td><td>0.030</td><td>0.186</td><td>0.852</td><td>0.171</td><td>0.781</td><td>0.880</td><td>0.626</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OFIBH:</td><td>9.6%</td><td>(68.8)</td><td>(0.015)</td><td>(0.126)</td><td>(0.185)</td><td>(0.132)</td><td>(0.248)</td><td>(0.217)</td><td>(0.244)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OBIB:</td><td>3.8%</td><td></td><td></td><td>[0.192]</td><td>[0]</td><td>[0.231]</td><td>[0]</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>F:</td><td>7.7%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MA:</td><td>51.9%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>TRB:</td><td>3.8%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CB:</td><td>5.8%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OFIB#:</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3rd quartile</td><td>OFIBH:</td><td>5.8%</td><td>82.1</td><td>0.029</td><td>0.196</td><td>0.878</td><td>0.187</td><td>0.859</td><td>0.947</td><td>0.682</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OBIB:</td><td>0%</td><td>(104.7)</td><td>(0.011)</td><td>(0.113)</td><td>(0.138)</td><td>(0.112)</td><td>(0.153)</td><td>(0.097)</td><td>(0.165)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>F:</td><td>15.4%</td><td></td><td></td><td>[0.135]</td><td>[0]</td><td>[0.154]</td><td>[0]</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MA:</td><td>3.8%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>TRB:</td><td>65.4% 1.9%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CB:</td><td>7.7%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OFIB#:</td><td>5.8%</td><td>59.4</td><td>0.027</td><td>0.253</td><td>0.919</td><td>0.249</td><td>0.920</td><td>0.984</td><td>0.733</td></tr><tr><td>4th quartile (largest group)</td><td>OFIBE:</td><td>1.9%</td><td>(83.5)</td><td></td><td>(0.108)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>OBIB:</td><td>5.8%</td><td></td><td>(0.013)</td><td>0019]</td><td>(0.150) [0]</td><td>(0.145)</td><td>(0.083)</td><td>(0.043)</td><td>(0.124)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>F:</td><td>5.8%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.01]</td><td>[0]</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MA:</td><td>67.3%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>TRB:</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CB:</td><td>3.8% 9.6%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

# 6. Conclusion

This paper empirically investigated the trading performances of intraday technical rules in individual stocks on the Japanese stock market. In addition to the price-based trading rules commonly examined in previous papers, we make a unique contribution to the body of knowledge on this topic by proposing and statistically investigating the technical rules that are formulated based on 1) the order-flow imbalance and 2) the order-book imbalance.

We first provided evidence of the short-term return predictability for more than half of the Nikkei 225-listed stocks in our sample, as little empirical evidence exists in the literature regarding the predictability of the short-horizon returns of individual stocks on the Japanese stock market. We then analyzed the profitability of 5,081 technical trading strategies for 207 individual stocks listed on the Nikkei 225 from September 1, 2006 to August 31, 2007. White’s Reality Check and Hansen’s Superior Predictive Ability bootstrapping procedures were applied to the 5-minute returns series in order to reduce the data-snooping problem. We demonstrated that all technical trading strategies fail to outperform the buy-and-hold strategy, indicating that information on past prices and on demand/supply in the order book are not related to technical trading profitability. Our results imply that transaction costs and the risks of non-execution and picking-off are too large for our technical rules to be profitable during our sample periods. We also demonstrated that our results are robust with sample periods of higher return volatility, covering September 1, 2005 to August 31, 2006.

Our results come from a sample of the Japanese stock market over two years, which may feature different risk premiums in the market. Investigating the profitability of the orderflow and order-book imbalance technical rules in other years, exchanges, and countries as well as longer samples is an important subject of future research.

# References

Allen, Franklin, and Risto Karjalainen, 1999, Using genetic algorithms to find technical trading rules, Journal of Financial Economics 51, 245–271.

Biais, B., Hillion, P., Spatt, C., 1995. An empirical analysis of the limit order book and the order flow in the Paris Bourse. Journal of Finance 50, 1655–1689.

Boehmer, Ekkehart, Gideon Saar, and Lei Yu, 2005, Lifting the Veil: An Analysis of Pretrade Transparency at the NYSE, Journal of Finance VOL. LX, NO. 2, 783-815.

Brock, William, Josef Lakonishok, and Blake LeBaron, 1992, Simple technical trading rules and the stochastic properties of stock returns, Journal of Finance 37, 1731-1764.

Chordia, Tarun, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2004, Order imbalance and individual stock returns: Theory and evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 72, 486–518.

Chordia, Tarun, Richard Roll, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2005, Evidence on the speed of convergence to market efficiency, Journal of Financial Economics 76, 271–292.

Chordia, Tarun, Richard Roll, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2008, Liquidity and market efficiency, Journal of Financial Economics 87, 249–268.

Comerton-Forde, and Carole, James Rydge, 2006, The current state of Asia-Pacific stock exchanges: A critical review of market design, Pacific-Basin Finance Journal 14, 1-32.

Dempster Michael A. H., and Y. S. Romahi, 2002, Intraday FX Trading: An Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning Approach, Lecture Notes on Computer Science Vol2412/2002.

Diebold, Francis X., and Roberto S. Mariano, 1995, Comparing predictive accuracy, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 13, 253-265.

Duong, Huu Nhan, Petko Kalev, and Chandrasekhar Krishnamurti, 2009, Order aggressiveness of institutional and individual investors, Pacific-Basin Finance Journal 17, 533-546.

Engle, Robert F., and Andrew J. Patton, 2004, Impacts of trades in an error-correction model of quote prices, Journal of Financial Markets 7, 1-25.

Goettler, Ronald L., Christine A. Parlour, and Uday Rajan, 2005, Equilibrium in a dynamic limit order market, Journal of Finance 60, 2149–2192.

Griffiths, Mark, Brian Smith, Alasdair Turnbull, and Robert White, 2000, The costs and the determinants of order aggressiveness, Journal of Financial Economics 56, 65–88.

Hall, A., Hautsch, N., 2006. Order aggressiveness and order book dynamics. Empirical Economics 30, 973-1005.

Han, Yufeng, Ke Yang, and Guofu Zhou, 2011, A new anomaly: The cross-sectional profitability of technical analysis. Working paper.

Handa, Puneet, and Robert Schwartz, 1996, Limit Order Trading, Journal of Finance 51, 1835–1861.

Handa, Puneet, Robert Schwartz, and Ashish Tiwari, 2003, Quote setting and price formation in an order driven market, Journal of Financial Markets 6, 461–489.

Hansen, Peter R., 2003, Asymptotic Tests of Composite Hypotheses, Mimeo, Brown University.

Hansen, Peter R., 2005, A test for superior predictive ability, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 23, 365–380.

Harris, Lawrence E., and Joel Hasbrouck, 1996, Market vs. Limit Orders: The SuperDOT Evidence on Order Submission Strategy, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 31, 213-231.

Harris, Lawrence E., and Venkatesh Panchapagesan, 2005, The Information Content of the Limit Order Book: Evidence from NYSE Specialist Trading Decisions, Journal of Financial Markets 8, 25–67.

Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C. Stein, 1999, A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and overreaction in asset markets, Journal of Finance 54, 2143–2184.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 2001, Profitability of momentum strategies: an evaluation of alternative explanations, Journal of Finance 56, 699–720.

Kavajecz, Kenneth A., and Elizabeth R. Odders-White, E., 2004, Technical Analysis and Liquidity Provision, Review of Financial Studies 17, 1043-1071.

LeBaron, Blake, 1999, Technical Trading Rule Profitability and Foreign Exchange Intervention, Journal of International Economics 49, 125-143.

LeBaron Blake, and Yan Zhao, 2008, Foreign Exchange Reversals in New Work Time, Working paper, Brandeis University.

Lee, Charles M. C., and Mark J. Ready, 1991, Inferring trade direction from intra-day data, Journal of Finance 46, 733–747.

Lo, Andrew W., and Craig MacKinlay, 1988, Stock market prices do not follow random walks: evidence from a simple specification test, Review of Financial Studies 1, 41–66.

Lo, Andrew W., and Craig MacKinlay, 1990, When are contrarian profits due to stock market overreaction? Review of Financial Studies 3, 175–205.

Lui, Yu-Hon, and David Mole, 1998, The use of fundamental and technical analysis by foreign exchange dealers: Hong Kong evidence, Journal of International Money and Finance 17, 535-545.

Marshall, Ben R., Sun Qian, and Martin Young, 2008, Is Technical Analysis Profitable On U.S. Stocks With Certain Size, Liquidity Or Industry Characteristics? Applied Financial Economics 19, 1213-1221.

Marshall, Ben R., Rochester H. Cahan, and Jared M. Cahan, 2008, Does intraday technical analysis in the US equity market have value? Journal of Empirical Finance 15, 199-210.

Menkhoff, Lukas, 2010, The use of technical analysis by fund managers: international evidence, Journal of Banking and Finance 34, 2573–2586.

Menkhoff, Lukas, and Mark. P. Taylor, 2007, The obstinate passion of foreign exchange professionals, Journal of Economic Literature 45, 936-972.

Neely, Christopher J., 2002, The Temporal Pattern of Trading Rule Returns and Exchange Rate Intervention: Intervention Does Not Generate Technical Trading Profits, Journal of International Economics 58, 211-232.

Neely, Christopher J., and Paul A. Weller, 2003, Intraday Technical Trading in the Foreign Exchange Market, Journal of International Money and Finance 22, 223-237.

Osler, Carol, 2003, Currency orders and exchange rate dynamics: An Explanation for the Predictive Success of Technical Analysis, Journal of Finance 58, 1791-1820.

Park, Cheol-Ho, and Scott H. Irwin, 2007, What do we know about the profitability of technical analysis? Journal of Economic Surveys 21, 786–826.

Parlour, Christine A., 1998, Price dynamics in limit order markets, Review of Financial Studies 11, 789–816.

Politis, Dimitris, and Joseph Romano, 1994, The stationary bootstrap, Journal of the American Statistical Association 89, 1303-1313.

Qi, Min, and Yangru Wu, 2006, Technical trading-rule profitability, data snooping, and reality check: evidence from the foreign exchange market, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 38, 2136-2158.

Ranaldo, Angelo, 2004, Order aggressiveness in limit order book markets, Journal of Financial Markets 7, 53–74.

Shynkevich, Andrei, 2012, Performance of technical analysis in growth and small cap segments of the US equity market, Journal of Banking and Finance 36, 193-208.

Su, Yong-Chern, Han-Ching Huang, and Ming-Wei Hsu, 2010, Convergence to market efficiency of top gainers, Journal of Banking and Finance 34, 2230-2237.

Sullivan, Ryan, Allan Timmermann, and Halbert White, 1999, Data-snooping, technical trading rule performance, and the bootstrap, Journal of Finance 54, 1647-1691.

Vaglica, Gabriella, Fabrizio Lillo, Esteban Moro, and Rosario N. Mantegna, 2008, Scaling laws of strategic behavior and size heterogeneity in agent dynamics, Physical Review E, 77:0036110.

Visaltanachoti, Nuttawat, and Ting Yang, 2010, Speed of convergence to market efficiency for NYSE-listed foreign stocks, Journal of Banking and Finance 34, 594–605.

West, Kenneth D., 1996, Asymptotic inference about predictive ability, Econometrica 64, 1067-1084.

White, Halbert, 2000, A Reality Check for Data Snooping, Econometrica 68, 1097-1126.

Yamamoto, Ryuichi, 2011, Order aggressiveness, pre-trade transparency, and long memory in an order-driven market, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 35, 1938-1963.